I now call this meeting of the city council
to order on Thursday, December 4th, 2025.
Please stand if you wish to for the Pledge of Allegiance
to the Republic that is the United States. I pledge
Allegiance to flag of the United States, America,
and to the Republic for which stands, one nation under God
in with liberty and justice for all.
All.
Alright, you got your seat belts fastened everybody.
Madam Clerk, may we have a roll call, please?
Counselor Coleman Here. Counselor Matthews? Yes ma'am.
Counselor Pride Here. Counselor Walker Here. Counselor West.
Yes. Counselor Scott here. And Mayor Tipton
Here.
Um, before we accept the minutes, I wanted
to welcome Counselor Scott to her first official meeting.
Thanks for being here.
And I also want to congratulate and thank Councilor West
and Councilor Matthews for re-upping.
They were, they were all sworn in in our inauguration on
Monday, which was very well produced by our city clerk.
So thank you very much.
Are there any additions
or corrections to the minutes of our November 18 meeting?
If there is no objection, hearing none, may I have a motion
for acceptance of the minutes by unanimous consent?
One second. Thank you. Um, okay.
All in favor? A unanimous vote. Thank you.
Um, if there is no objection, we're going
to postpone the appointment calendar.
That is items number C or petition
and communications or, yes.
Oh, I'm sorry. I skipped petition and communications.
How rude. That's, that is a city clerk activity.
So this is just highlighting that we are now open
for nominations and applications for 26
through 28 election clerks.
Uh, we have a fantastic group of election clerks
that have served for many years,
but we do want to reach out to get some new folks in.
We provide comprehensive training,
but these people are the foundation of our election process.
So if there is anyone that is of interest,
there's more information
and these will be open until April of next year.
Thank you. Now there is no objection.
I'm going to move to postpone the appointment calendar
to our next meeting.
December nine. I don't see any objections,
so we will pass that by unanimous consent.
Alright, that brings us to the consent calendar.
So first we would like to hear the rules for public comment.
Members of the public are invited to comment on any topic,
on or off the agenda during citizen discussion.
Part one for part two for up to three minutes.
If you are here to speak on an item appearing on tonight's
agenda, you are encouraged to wait
until this item comes up on the agenda
where you will have three minutes to speak.
If you're unable to wait, you may speak on the matter
during citizen discussion part one,
however, you will not be permitted to speak on the topic.
Again. Similarly, members of the public
who speak on a topic when it comes up on the agenda,
will not have the opportunity to speak
during citizen discussion.
Part two, all speakers are asked
to see their name and address for the record.
Thank you. During all of the public comment periods,
there's a timer that is running on both screens
to help you pace yourself.
And the city clerk will let you know when you have 30
seconds left to bring your comments to a close.
Madam Clerk, will you please read the items
on the consent calendar?
Order number 67 25 26 Library Advisory Board
for Nancy Burrow for District four for a term
that expires December 30th, 2028.
Order number 125 26 Public Arts Committee
for Eric Whitman at large for a term
that expires January 31st, 2029,
order number 1 0 5 25 26, setting the dates
of the 26th City Council
and order number 1 0 6 25 26,
creating a Willard Beach paid parking working group.
All items read on the consent calendar
require a majority vote.
Thank you very much.
Does any counselor wish
to remove an item from the consent calendar?
Okay, well, items on the consent calendar then are now open
for public comment.
Do any members of the public wish
to comment on items listed on the consent calendar?
If you do, please come to the podium
and let us know your name
and the street you live on and let's hear your comment.
All right. Well,
There?
Yes. Can I make a point? Yes, please.
I I just wanna make sure on the, um, on the consent
where there's the creation
of the Willard Beach paid parking working group.
The an erroneous order was a, a a a copy
and paste error was, was what was posted.
So we updated an amended order.
So I just wanna make sure it should be clear to everyone,
but just in case what council is passing is the amended
order with, um, with the detail
that council had discussed at that last workshop,
not the one that says order.
Is everyone clear on that?
You've been able to see the amended? Okay.
Alright. And we have no public comment on
consent calendar items.
So what is the wish of the council? Move the passage.
Thank you. Mr. Matthews is a second Councillor West.
Thank you. May we have a vote? All those in favor?
Yay. Anyone opposed?
No, the result is unanimous.
Okay. Now, we've reached the first public comment period
for items on and off the agenda,
and we prefer that if you wish
to make comments about an item that is on the agenda,
you wait until the agenda item comes up this evening.
But if that's not possible, please make your comments. Now.
State your name, the street you live on, um,
and you have three minutes to make your comment.
Does anyone wish to make a comment? Aha.
We have our first volunteer.
Good evening, Madam Mayor and the city Council.
My name is Tim Honey.
I live at 2 1 5 High Street,
unit 1 0 3 South Portland, Maine.
And, um, I wanna, I'm a coordinator
of the Toss the Tanks campaign,
and I just want to give you an update
and then I have a sheet that I'll pass out to you.
Um, after I speak, um, I want to want to try to talk about
where we think we stand in this.
And all of you are undoubtedly aware that on September 6th,
the South Portland Council wrote to Suncor
and said, we welcome the opportunity to begin a dialogue
and invite your team to meet with our representatives
and the city to explore the path forward.
And I thought that, and I've said this
before, that it was an excellent letter, um, to,
to start the process.
You got a, a response from Suncor on November 7th, um,
and Suncor did not respond to the invite by the city
to explore pass forward.
Suncor, Suncor did not say anything about the
property being on the market.
Suncor did not say anything about future plans for Suncor
to operate the facility.
Suncor did not say anything about divesting of its property.
All they said was, we have not decided
to sell at this time.
Well, what we know right now as I stand here is
that the Suncor facility is not operational
and is not sending crude oil through their pipeline
to their tank farm, uh, in Montreal.
We also know that a very small amount of oil is flowing
through the pipeline to keep it lubricated,
and it has not been operated for years.
Suncor, through the operator,
the Portland pipeline has applied for a five year license,
uh, a five year license, um, which extends the one
that they have right now from the main Department
of Environmental Protection.
And that will be decided upon, uh, no later than the end
of February next year.
Um, and the state license application requires Suncor
to put forward a closeout plan outlining the site,
remediation required,
and posting a bond for the cost of the shutdown
and site remediation.
And now, what are we probably most concerned about?
Given what, what we know here, we are concerned
that Suncor may continue to allow the Hill Street Tank farm
to deteriorate along with its associated 30 seconds,
um, infrastructure.
Um, down at bug light, the tank farm will become increasing,
uh, increasing hazard to our community.
We must find a win-win solution to allow for the removal
of the tanks and the complete remediation
of Suncor's properties and infrastructure.
Thank you very much, and I will give you all a copy
of our December report.
Thank you very much for your comment. Mr.
Honey, do we have anyone else who'd like to make a comment?
Thank you. Uh, John Piney Beere, uh,
congratulations on a new year for the city council,
and congratulations to Mayor Tipton.
Um, I would like to speak to the issue
of living in a coastal community in a time
of changing climate, uh, where we have different storms from
what we used to have
and where sea level rise is a, uh, long term concern.
Um, in the Willwood Beach neighborhood where I live,
there have been some recent adaptations
to the threat of flooding.
Uh, my wife and I have, uh, built a living shoreline,
uh, where the ground needed to be stabilized.
Where we are, uh, a neighbor is elevating their home
where it needed to be moved out of harm's way.
Um, in both of these cases, the engineering is new,
it is innovative, uh,
and in both of these cases, uh,
the funding is from private sources.
Uh, people who have a stake in a property will pay
to protect it.
Um, there will be places, uh, where city, state,
or federal money is needed to amend city property in order
to protect a neighborhood.
The city or the state will have to spend at some point.
Uh, but I think it's clear
that a major burden will be carried
by private property owners.
We are already doing it.
Um, the same dynamics will take place
for development in other areas.
The Eastern waterfront is a derelict
and underutilized property.
Uh, private funding will make that area safe
and resilient if it is worthwhile for the property owners
to pay that money.
If it's worthwhile for them, they will pay
to make the area resilient.
There remains the question of what counts as safe
and resilient, uh, for building and renovation.
I was recently on the, uh, citizen advisory Board
for the revision of shoreland zoning.
Uh, this effort is run by the planning office under Milan,
Nevada, the Sustainability office under Julie Rosenbach,
and with participation of UTL Design,
a private consulting firm, um, this group, 30 seconds.
This group is doing an excellent job of identifying,
uh, the issues for coastal development.
Uh, and they are creating sound policy, uh,
for zoning in coastal areas.
It is a well-reasoned approach
that should guide decision making in South South Portland
with respect to climate issues.
Uh, a sound policy for protecting I'm,
oops, just a bit.
I came out in this cold weather. No,
About 15 more seconds.
Okay. A sound policy
for protecting coastal areas will give residents confidence
to stay and to invest in their homes and neighborhoods.
Without that, coastal neighborhoods will decay
and families will refuse to continue
or to join in these neighborhoods. Thank you.
Thank you Mr. Ponty.
Does anyone else want to make a comment on an item off
or on the agenda?
Jeff Steinbrink, cottage Road counselors.
Uh, I want to join my friend John Ponty in congratulating
you on the launch of a new city council, a new year
for city council, uh, and to wish you all the best in that.
And at the same time, to congratulate outgoing mayor
and now councilman again, Dick Matthews for
I remember about a year ago his, uh, offering, hoping
that the past year in city council would be best ever.
I haven't been around long enough
to gauge whether it was best ever,
but I think it was a good year,
and I congratulate you for that too.
Um, mayor Matthews has the gift, a good humor
that sometimes I think disguises the fact
that he is also a man of very serious purpose.
And that combination, I think, worked well for us.
So in all of this, I'm reminded of the spirit of my friend,
our friend Russ Lund.
And I just wanna mention his name at the launch
of a new city council because I think that's appropriate.
Um, and to say, uh, I'm, I'm sorry, as we're all sorry
that he can't be here to do that himself.
I want to make clear once again, that I am
by no means presuming to be Russ Lund Jr.
Or 2.0. None of that. Absolutely.
The other thing I wanna say though, has to do with something
that the president of the United States
did yesterday in a cabinet meeting
for all the world to see and hear.
He denigrated an entire population of people,
Somali Americans
in a minute and 20 seconds.
There's no way a person can begin to do justice
to the outrage that I feel about that performance,
but I do want to say that was a scurrilous, awful,
tiny minded, small man thing to do.
But more importantly, to
say on behalf, I think of all South Portlanders,
our Somali American neighbors need to feel welcome,
safe at home, invested in this community,
and they need to hear from us that welcome.
They need to hear from us that even the nonsense
and the cruelty that comes out of Washington,
um, we have an antidote for that.
And the antidote for that is our caring,
our speaking out are not allowing that kind of
depravity to have any foothold in our community.
We will not have that.
And our Somali neighbors, our Somali American neighbors need
to feel welcome, safe, and at home here among us.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Mr. Stein Brink.
Is there anyone else who wanted to make a comment?
Seeing none, citizen Discussion part one is now closed. Mr.
Meley, did you note any questions? No questions. Okay.
So now we'll move on to public hearings and actions.
Would the city clerk please read order
number 1 0 7,
Order number 1 0 7 25 26,
granting Benjamin Building wrecking at 41 Jackson Street,
a renewal for their automobile graveyard.
Junkyard license passage requires majority vote.
Um, as the position paper states, this is a longstanding
existing business within our city.
Um, this does requires council's approval,
so it is being brought back to you for that.
Uh, we have published the legal ad
and received all feedback from the approval departments.
There was no complaints or concerns brought forward
regarding this, this license being approved.
Any counselors have questions at this time? No.
Okay. Well then we'll open this item up for public comment.
Anyone wish to make a public comment about this?
I item seeing none.
Um, what is the wish of our council move for passage?
Thank you Mr. Matthews. Do we have a second here?
Oh, thank you. Councilor Coleman. Seconded.
Did you want to say something Mr. Matthews? No.
Longstanding business. They're doing very good.
Thank you. And I will say this is part of waste
Reduction. Let's
Reuse.
Okay. Any other counselor comments? No.
Seeing none this passage requires a majority vote.
All in favor. It is seven
to zip in favor.
Thank you. The order passes
now we'll move on to the next one.
City clerk, please read order number 1 0 8, order
Number 1 0 8 25 26, granting Asian House, kitchen,
and Bar at 1 69 Ocean Street, a food establishment
with alcohol for the restaurant.
This establishment has recently opened
with just a food establishment license, as many
of you may have seen recently.
So they're anxiously awaiting this approval this week.
We have submitted a legal ad in the paper as well
as routed this for approval for their liquor license,
and there has been no concern or objections.
Thanks counselor. Questions on this one?
Okay. Um, any members of the public wish to make comment?
No. What's the wish and will of the council
Move for passage?
Thank you. Seconded by Counselor West.
And do we have a unanimous vote on this one? Let's see.
We do not. Anyone in a oppose opposed?
No, I'm sorry. You know, you didn't ask for comments,
Questions. Oh, I'm so sorry.
Okay.
And I asked for questions, not comments.
Do we have comments? I
Just wish them luck.
And I just wanted to say
how much I appreciate the standards
appearing in the council item.
This. And I think that's very important
that we see the standards for denial as part of the item
that comes before the council. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Um, alright.
Now we can see what the vote is. All in favor.
We have another unanimous vote for passage.
The next item, Madame City Clerk Ordinance
number 13. Thank you.
Ordinance number 13 25 26 amending Chapter 27 zoning
regarding density relief for affordable housing
and related miscellaneous updates.
First reading passed on November 13th, 2025
and passage requires five affirmative votes.
And this will be a roll call vote.
Counselor questions? Any public comment?
What is the will of the council
Move for passage?
Thank you. Moved by Counselor Matthews.
Do we have a second? Second by Counselor West. Mr. Matthews?
Yes. Did the Mr.
City manager, did you wanna say anything on this?
No updates that you, you all heard the presentation? Okay.
I just wanna make sure we're still recommending
passage. Thank you. Alright.
All good. Thank you. So you're good.
Did you wanna say something? Council West
My question, did they identify any other places in the
city that we know about where this change might apply?
Thank you. Councilor West, uh,
me invited the planning director.
So we did as part of the presentation,
provide some analysis on theoretical other sites.
So there are a number, um, but we are aware,
and I think Ben Monie from the House of Authorities here,
that they're interested in, uh, looking at the similar, um,
approach at the immediately adjacent property
of Mill Cove apartments.
It's a very rare circumstance where, um,
there's an affordable, affordable housing project
and they've already exceeded the density
bonus, what they would allow.
So these two are really the best opportunities
for everything else is sort of two small scale that really,
uh, wouldn't move forward, but it's
theoretically possible elsewhere as well.
Yeah. Thank you.
Anyone else? No questions, comments? Oops. Um,
I, Gosh, sorry.
I'm losing my place. Don't worry everyone.
I will eventually find my rhythm. Um, did we? No.
Yep. You can just do a roll call. Yes, we do.
We do have, it's a roll call vote
because this is a zoning related ordinance.
Madam City clerk, can we have a roll call?
Counselor Matthews? Yes, ma'am.
Councilor West? Yes. Counselor Pride?
Yes. Counselor
Scott? Yes.
Counselor Walker? Yes. Councillor Coleman? Yes.
And Mayor Tipton?
Yes. Alright.
We have a unanimous passage on that one as well.
We have gotten to action on old and new business.
Would the city clerk please read Ordinance number 14?
Ordinance number 14, 25 26 amending Chapter
18 Parks and Recreation.
To add an article for cemeteries passage
requires majority vote.
Okay. Quest, did, did you want to
Talk? Yeah, I would just say, I
think there,
there was some issues raised today, um, pointed out by, um,
councilor West that, um, I think speak to the need to
postpone this item, uh, to the January 6th meeting so
that we can consult with the corporation council.
There may need to be some tweaks that we have to make, um,
definition of, uh, city owned.
We don't technically own any cemeteries, for example,
but we have to maintain them.
So there's some tweaks like that that,
you know, we, we, we should make.
There's, there's not a rush to to, to get this.
Um, so there's no, there would be no, uh, issue
with delaying it tonight other than we made
Carl come out in the wind.
Alright. So you are recommending a motion to postpone, um,
do and Councillor West.
Are you motioning? Do you wanna move
or can we do that without a motion?
Yeah, without objection. Right.
All right. We have no objection to postponement. Alright.
We're postponing ordinance number 14.
Thanks Carl. Carl,
you are extremely into, so something just quickly.
Oh yeah. Oh, okay. Come on down.
Carl Coughlin Parks Rec Waterfront Cemetery Director.
Uh, this is, uh, un unrelated to this,
but, uh, tomorrow night we have the tree
lighting ceremony at Mill Creek Park.
Four 30 to six 30.
Uh, lights flipping on right around six o'clock.
I've been told this is gonna be our best year ever.
So please come to Mill Creek Park, enjoy the lights.
Happy holidays. Have a great new year. See you January soon.
Thank you, Carl. Thank you very much.
Okay, Madam City Clerk, order number 1 0 9, please
Order 1 0 9 25 26.
Amending the city council policy on boards
and committees by adding a budget request process passage
requires majority vote.
Would you like to Yes. Present this for us?
Thank you so much. Thank you,
Mayor. So, about three months ago,
uh, at the request of councilor,
uh, west, the city, uh, council held a workshop
to discuss a funding process, um, for,
uh, boards and committees.
Right now, it's not really a structured process.
Um, the committees will make requests
to their staff liaison.
Those staff liaisons will put that request in their budget.
So, for example, if it was a request from the planning
board, it would show up in the planning budget, uh,
and then it would be up to me during the budget process
to review and make a recommendation
to the council on that request.
Um, after your workshop, uh, the council had directed, uh,
me to, uh, work with the city clerk
and finance director, uh, to come up with a, uh,
more formalized process based on some suggestions that, uh,
councilor West had and that you all had agreed with.
So in front of you, um, uh, is the, is the mechanical way
to do this, uh, is, uh, amending your existing policy on,
uh, council boards and committees by adding a section
that talks about budget requests.
And so, effectively the process now,
if you pass this amendment, would be that the committees,
um, will make a request on a form
that the clerk will provide to them.
Um, uh,
and they can make two types of requests,
operating budget requests and special project requests.
The operating budget requests are
for typical things like membership dues, um, if they want
to do some outreach and advertising for different events
or, uh, provide information to the public, et cetera.
Um, as talked about at the meeting, there would be a cap on
that of $2,500 per committee per year.
Then they could also, uh, request, uh, special projects
that they want to put on a larger event.
They want to, um, have an art mural commissioned.
They want to put some money in the city's
affordable housing trust fund.
Um, those could be requested separately.
And there's of course no cap on those types of things.
Uh, so, uh, when the requests come in,
the operating requests, the ones that are up to 2,500,
those would still be reviewed by me.
Uh, and I can make recommendations to you all either yes,
what they requested is good or, or no, it should be less
because of this or it should be nothing.
Uh, and you still, even though I might recommend a different
amount or, or the full amount,
you still retain the full authority to, um, uh, uh,
decide whether or not that amount goes through.
Uh, and instead
of appearing in the various department budgets,
they'll now all be consolidated in your city council budget
since they technically are creatures of the council, your,
your standing committees or whatnot.
Um, the second part, the special projects,
those won't be included in any budget request.
Not the department request, not the manager recommended,
but those will appear, uh, in, uh,
at the budget workshop when the council budget is discussed.
So typically, um, either the second
or fourth Tuesday in April,
whichever night the council budget get specifically
discussed, those individual special project requests will be
considered, uh, with the committee coming up, presenting
to you for three minutes.
You have the ability to ask questions,
there can be public comment on it, um,
and, uh, uh, uh, well not public comment,
but they'll be able to, um, speak to that
and others will be too.
And then counsel will decide whether
or not to include that in the budget.
Um, it does have the requirement too,
you all were specific about you wanted to see a detailed,
uh, budget request.
And so this policy requires that they don't just ask
for 2,500, they have to spell out, we want 500 for this,
a thousand for that, seven 50 for this, et cetera.
So, um, it does provide, uh, that, um, that level
of detail that you were looking for.
So, um, that's essentially it.
Uh, if you have any questions, I'm happy to try
to answer them, the, the clerk's here as well to, um,
answer any part that she has involvement with.
But otherwise, um, this seems to fit with
what you talked about at your work shop.
So we recommend, uh, approval.
Alright, thank you so much.
Scott, do we have questions amongst the counselors?
Oh, you are not a very chatty group. Oh, counselor Walker. I
Have. Thank you. I have several.
Oh, good.
Uh, my first question is, does this apply
to all committees including the, um,
human Rights Commission?
Yes. The way it was, the, the direction we got,
our general guidance was for boards and committees.
So this is applicable to correct all,
all boards, committees, and commissions. Okay.
Um, in terms of budget, I'm kind
of going out on order on my notes, so, uh,
forgive me for this, but in That's all right.
In terms of budget, so this has the potential
to grow the city council's budget exponentially correct.
Because they hadn't appeared in your budget before. Yes.
Now that when they are, are put,
consolidated into your budget, it, it, the, any sort of, uh,
request will be shown there
unless it's for, um, you know, you want
to put money in the Affordable Housing Trust.
I think there's a separate line that,
you know, that would go into.
Um, but, but yes, if, if, um,
if you added a thousand dollars for conservation,
that would now show up in the council budget. Correct.
And then in terms of budget requests themselves, um,
we're talking about, you know, citizen volunteers on most
of these committees who may
or may not have a lot of experience
with making budget requests.
Would the staff liaison be the one that's responsible
for working with the committee
to ensure they put together a satisfactory?
I, I'd hate to see a committee come forward
to make a budget request and then us not consider it,
because there might be things missing from the budget
request, or it may not be what we would expect one to be
Y Yeah. Good, good point.
So the staff leaders, liaison, liaison,
that's definitely one of the major reasons they're there, is
to provide that assistance to different committees.
Um, and, uh, I know the city clerk, you know, uh,
in creating the form for the request, um, you know,
will send that, uh, information, uh, out to the committee
so they understand, you know, themselves what is needed, uh,
under this new protocol.
I will say the several committees right now already do
request funding, so it's not gonna be a ton different
for them other than they're not gonna go to like Milan
for a planning board request now
that it's gonna be submitted directly to, um, uh,
well the city clerk can ultimately go
to the finance director and I, um,
and also, um, uh, some
of them do provide detailed breakdowns already of
what they're requesting and it will show up in like the
note section of the budget.
But, um, some of them aren't quite as detailed,
and so that will be explicit on the form that they need
to include, you know,
as a required field, the level of detail.
But I know staff will definitely,
especially this first year,
be there to help them out with that.
Okay. And then what about like off cycle requests?
So we're talking about, I understand the training, um,
trainings and certifications,
but you know, let's say July rolls around
and a committee realizes there's a big project
that they want to, to do,
or a, um, an event that they want to put on
that they would not, because
of the committee makeup may be known
about it during budget time.
Do they then have to wait until the following year?
Uh, council in theory could consider that.
Um, if they approached you
and said, we, you know, we, we,
we'd like $20,000 to do this event.
They can, they can do that now.
There's no strict prohibition on that this,
but, um, counsel doesn't necessarily have
to automatically consider it
because you could also say, this is our policy and,
and you, you didn't follow it, but it would really,
unless you wanted to get explicit about that,
there's no prohibition on that.
But just because there's not a prohibition doesn't mean
that you automatically, we have to consider it,
it would really be at your discretion.
Okay. I know that's kind of a, it depends, uh,
lawyerly answer, but, um, it, it probably does.
Okay. Nick has a question.
Dick has a question. Yes. Who,
Well, councilor Carter can go first.
Councilor Scott can go first.
I like Counselor Carter actually. Alright, nice.
And Literative Counselor Carter.
Scott, I just had a follow up.
Is the council required
to have an amount set aside in the annual budget if there
are to be interim year amounts allocated
to committees? Is that, how
Is that, how, um, essentially what would happen is someone
came to you midyear, um,
you'd be looking at taking it probably from fund balance.
Um, or the committee would say, Hey, we got a grant,
we need a, you know, um, we need a match.
And, uh, and that would be a similar thing.
You'd probably, unless they find,
unless they identified some sort
of other source, if you Right.
If you don't put 10,000 aside for mid-year request, uh,
it would essentially come from fund balance.
Thank you. Council,
I just want some clarification on council walker's,
uh, thoughts.
So Council Walker,
and so were you saying, let's say, uh,
the arts committee uh, comes forward
and says, we want $3,000 for the year
and we in our April negotiation say, yep, okay,
we're gonna award them $3,000 a year.
And then you are saying, I think I heard you say,
but then in July they come
and they say, we got this great project.
Can they come forward for $20,000? Right?
Is that what you were saying? Yeah. Or, okay.
But I, the, the only reason I'm worried about
that particular, the way that was worded,
I would rather them come in April
and make sure they have the funding they need.
Because us trying to find $20,000 as a counselor
in July, I, I don't even know where we would, I don't know
where we would even remotely find that. Go ahead.
Um, so I was more thinking of committees
who didn't come forward during the budget process
because they didn't necessarily have an id
something identified.
So like the bike P committee decided in this August, well,
they started working on, I think in June
to put on an event about the green belt, you know, about,
you know, bike bicycle safety, helmet safety, um,
bike speed on the green belt.
And they pulled off an amazing event in August
on a real shoestring budget.
Um, but they didn't know at the time of the budget workshops
that they were, they were going to do that.
It was kind of an organic thing.
So, you know, it's more instances than like that than
a committee coming forward multiple times
over the course of the year.
Right. And again, me personally,
I would encourage all committees to come forward to ask
for something because it's easier to find money in March
and April versus trying to find money in July or June.
I mean, once we pass the budget trying to find money,
I mean the, we could, we're supposed to be asking questions.
Oh, yes. Okay. We're, we're discussing.
We're not supposed to do that. We can come back to that.
I'll come back to this. Okay.
Oh, I know every reason I was sitting next to you.
Thank you. Thank you both of you. Um, okay.
Does anyone else who is a counselor have questions?
All right. Then do any members of the public want
to make a comment about this item?
No. Alright. What is the wish of the council?
Yes, counselor West. Move
For passage. Move for passage.
Thank you. Do we have a second?
Counselor? Matthews.
Alright, so it sounds like we need
to have further discussion amongst the councilors.
Take off what we left off. Don't,
I mean, Counselor West.
I know it's cold outside so we can
be kind of cash tonight.
Um, I I just wanted to say that part of why I,
or one of the main reasons I brought this by forth is
that I wanted our boards
and committees to know that they can,
that they should come forward and ask us for money.
I mean, some of them seem to feel that they always have
to just do everything with volunteer help and,
and there are committees.
And so I think it's good that we keep responsibility
for them and I want them to know that they do have, that
I, as a counselor and I,
and I believe that most of us feel the same way
and we only to set aside funds so
that they can carry out their functions
and they can get training to carry out their functions
and other, because they're serving the community.
And we have such talented people who have,
have volunteered their time.
And I want to make it possible as much as we can with it,
the resources we have available for them
to encourage them and to support them.
And Dick, did you,
I just want to say, like I said, uh, uh, you know,
not all committees are probably gonna come forward
and I want the public to know
that we're not just handing money out to, uh, you know,
they're giving specific reasons and educational purposes
and trainings and stuff like that.
So, uh, and safety.
Um, but again, I would encourage all committees
to come well
before our, uh, budget hearings with a, uh, proposal.
Uh, it's a lot money easier
to find the money then than it is in June and July.
That's, you know, that's a given.
And I thought I saw one comment.
I just wonder if it makes sense to be clear about
that this is the process to follow
and that there is not an opportunity during the year,
or if there is, if we want to illustrate that more clearly
in the spirit of the committee that would like $500 to help
with a shoestring event in the middle and in transparency
and clarity about what the process is.
I wonder if we wanna make that we more clear.
I don't have a strong position on it,
but it seems to be an area that's not clarified.
Did I, I
have concerns about this.
Um, kind of on opposite ends of the spectrum.
One, I have a concern about how this could impact committees
that have their own standalone funding right now,
like the Human Rights Commission.
Um, I think now more than ever, equity work is so important
and I am wary of
what this might be perceived as.
And I understand that, you know, politics
and perception is not what we are governing by,
but I want to make sure that we think through
any unintended consequences of this.
Um, and then on that line with unintended consequences,
I'm also concerned with the perception
that we are ballooning our budget unnecessarily.
So if we do encourage committees to come forward, um,
especially for things like training
and certification without a general idea of, of where
that might put us ahead of time in terms
of a council budget, it could make
for some pretty dicey citizen discussions
when it comes time for the budget workshop.
So, I, I don't disagree with Counselor West Point
that we should have a bucket
that our volunteers should be able to draw from to,
especially for training and certification
because they are volunteering their time and services.
Um, but I'm, I don't know if, if this is the right approach.
Any other counselors want
to make comments? Councilor Pride?
Um, and before my comments, I just wanna ask,
was there a reason that $2,500 was the limit,
That was an amount that was
thrown out during the workshop? Um,
Can you tell me what the average budget
for the Human Rights Commission has been in like the
last two, three years?
I'll have to take a look, but,
uh, I can pull that up here.
I I think it's 6,000.
No, it was, I think it has my recalls
that it's averaged around 10.
Yeah. But that some of that,
what they requested may fall in the special projects
category too, which doesn't have a cat because it's,
because that, I'm not sure it was
advertising or memberships.
It was more things like putting on the
Juneteenth event or something.
Yes. Or or something like that.
Okay. For, for a period
of time they were giving a scholarship, for example.
Yeah. And this wouldn't, like for the, um,
the event that the, uh,
economic Development Committee puts on
this wouldn't cap their ability to put on this their event
because it's a special event.
Uh, it's not really funded through the EDC.
That's something that's actually
through the economic development budget itself.
Uh, this the department budget. Yeah.
So it's, it's something that staff put on
with the assistance of the EDC.
So, um, uh, it's, uh, um, yeah,
it's not right, it's not funded through.
Does that committee does that,
'cause we've had this discussion
before where we have city departments that cover an area,
and then we have some, uh, some committees
that are sort of, you know, side
by side with that city department.
And so we have some duplication of, of job
and oversight and whatnot.
And then we have some committees like the, um,
I don't know, conservation Commission.
No, we've got sustainability.
So that's sort of the same thing.
But there are some committees that don't have that same, uh,
parallel duplication.
Does this put those committees that don't have a department
that backs them up specifically at a,
on a different playing field than those committees that do.
And they're all, they're all under this tr
uh, created the same.
And I don't know, aside from human rights, any
of the committees, um,
and I don't have the exact numbers in front of me that
needs a large budget
or has been given one in the past on a consistent basis in
order to kind of carry, carry out their functions, um,
you know, you all could, um,
if you feel 25 hundred's not enough,
for example, you could amend that tonight.
You could see how it goes for a year
and see if that's kind of, uh, well received
or not by the committees.
And if it's not enough, you could adjust it next year too.
Um, but I think a lot of the things, if,
if they are larger requests probably would be under
that special projects kind of category versus the standard,
Hey, this is what we need to, to, for lack of a better term,
keep the lights on for the next year and,
and do our committee, um, work.
I, I guess I just have the concern that, you know,
we've got a committee like, um, the Human Rights Commission
or Age Friendly South Portland, they, they don't,
they can't fall back on that department,
but the EDC can say, wow, this doesn't fit in our budget.
Let's see if we can get money from the
department to do this thing.
Or sustainability, you know,
con Conservation Commission wants to do something
and they're like, oh, let's see,
Julie's probably got some money in her budget
that she can throw behind this thing.
And so now some committees can draw from the city
and get what they need funded
and other committees can't do that.
And so I, I agree with my fellow counselors,
there should be some mechanism
that those committees especially have a way of, um,
you know, looking at potentially getting more funding
during the year if, if something comes up.
Because I feel like, you know, conservation Commission, um,
and you know, EEC and,
and some others, you know, they have that extra backing,
whereas age friendly, they, we don't have a,
an age friendly department in the city
to give them more money if they
Need it. Okay.
I,
And I'll speak for age friendly.
Age friendly has had the benefit that they're also,
uh, with a A RP and have, uh, apply for grants
and receive monies that way and have, um,
because they put forth their projects and competed.
Um, and,
and that's all I'll say about that.
I thought I saw a counselor.
Scott, you had one more comment. Well,
I just had a, a question and maybe a clarification.
My interpretation
of the last workshop discussion in this policy was sort
of the, was separate from ways that committees are funded
through departments or other means.
I don't know how the Human Rights Commission is funded,
but I assume that this doesn't sort of pull all of
that funding into this process.
But this is sort of a extra process
and maybe that is something that needs to be clarified
or I need to under better understand how that funding
and budgeting works through the regular city budget
and that this is a separate pathway
that would come to council. Okay.
I think you may not have it exactly right.
I asked the city manager to answer you. Yeah.
I mean, none of the committees really get
money from city departments.
It's not, I I understand what Councilor Pride is saying
that, you know, there's, there's over, you know,
related functions where, you know, the EDC helps
to put on the business awards.
And so, but that's funded through the,
the economic development budget.
But the, I I don't know if your question to this,
but there's not, there's not instances that I can recall
where, where committees are necessarily going
to department saying, Hey, we don't have a budget for this.
Can you, can you cover it? Okay.
Um, they typically, if they want something have asked
for it Conservation, human Rights Commission, um, uh,
trying to think age friendly.
Different groups have come here during the budget process
and you've considered whether or not to give them funding.
So this would be in theory,
the only way a committee could get money to spend, if any
of them, you know, to councilor Price point could ask a
department for for money.
I just, I don't, I don't know of that happening necessarily.
No, that that's helpful. I was concerned about it sort
of disrupting a process where there was money
set aside, say for Human Rights Commission.
Yeah. So, okay. Thank you.
Not specifically. Okay.
Councilor West, you have another thought?
Well, I just that we do need to have a process
and the purpose of it is to try
to have some kind of consistent process.
And I, I do think it's appropriate for the council
to take responsibility
and I appreciate the way the staff has, um,
has crafted this approach,
which I think is really reasonable given
that they are our boards and committees.
And so I really urge that we go forward with this.
And if it's like everything else, if it
after a year it doesn't work too well,
we can try something different.
But right now it's been pretty chaotic
And not very much accountability.
I think I'd just like to add to that, that the $2,500
cap right now, as far as
things are tight, we know things are tight.
This is gonna be a tight budget year
and I'd rather stop low than start high
because we start high.
We may have to tell everybody No.
So I just want to caution us on that, that
it's gonna be a tight budget year.
So does, can I ask you for clarification, are you saying
that 2,500 is a good cap or it feels high?
I it is a good cap. I right now I think that we need
to stop with that
and not go, I thought I heard somebody say
5,000 or something.
I, okay. You know, so.
Okay. Anyone else?
Well, I guess I will take the liberty of weighing in, um,
from this different chair.
Um, I Like the idea
of modeling for the committees.
That they are entitled to some budget,
that it may help them do their work
and that they should come forward
and make, um, at least the $2,500 request.
Not that they should invent things they don't think are part
of the reason the committee exists,
but I think it is a way
of showing them, look, you're important.
You need to be doing some things, some thinking, um,
some spread spreading
of information from gathering some information from,
um, our residents.
That's what you're there for.
And if you need some money to do it, that's
what the budget process is for.
I would be very concerned if the Human Rights committee
commission, for example, could not ask for money over
and above for special projects.
From what I've seen of the Human Rights Commission budgets
that come in, a lot of it is very carefully allocated for
or delegated for a project.
Um, so I am, I would encourage
and think that we will see the Human Rights Commission come
forward and ask for, um, project monies.
And as far as this, you know, bloating the council budget
or something, I, I think our council should show
that we are in support of committee projects, um,
because they do help educate the residents.
So this evening I'll be voting in favor of this
even knowing that we're voting for kind
of an experimental year.
Alright, do we have a vote? All in favor?
All opposed? We have Councilor Walker. Opposed?
The rest in favor? Thank you very much.
Feels like we had a good discussion.
Good luck to our committees. They're important.
Um, they help us carry out our job.
City clerk, would you read order number one 10? Thank you.
Order number 1, 10 25, 26.
City council appointments to city
and regional boards, committees and commissions.
Passenger requires majority vote.
So attached here this evening is a draft
of the council appointments as they have stood as well
as some notations to note for council
before we have any discussion.
Just bringing it up. Hold on one second.
So I did place, uh, for the draft,
I did place in Linda Cohen for the Metro Board as
that had been previously mentioned at a business meeting
that she was interested in remaining on that.
Um, and then the other one that I wanted
to mention is the Eco Board of directors.
It is actually only two seats now as of September.
So if City Council did want to keep an extra person
as an alternate to be able to step in if necessary,
that can be done.
If not, it would remain as, uh, the two individuals.
Melissa Hutchins and Linda Burrow for the economic.
That's Linda Boudreau, correct? Yes.
Linda Boudreau for Eco Maine Board of Directors.
And the other one I wanted
to notate was our Jetport Noise Advisory committee.
Um, our resident potentially may stay on, may not stay on,
so I did wanna put that on there as a potential vacancy
for the resident seat, not only for counselors,
but for the members of the public.
Um, so that might be something that we want to discuss
Other than I believe that was everything.
The last one was age friendly.
So that had previously been Councilor Matthews last year
when Councilor Matthews was mayor,
we added Councilor Coleman to that seat in case
of scheduling and availability.
Um, there is only one seat for it, so that is something
to consider if we wanna keep the alternate four as well so
that way they both can remain.
I did just wanted to indicate those for you.
Okay. Um, the what? Sorry?
I was reading something. What? No, no, it wasn't you.
Oh, you're good. I was supposed bring Oh, you,
you won't get to take, wait a second.
I gotta get used to Natalie sitting No, what you,
My recall of this is that we have
a less formal conversation than comments
followed by questions.
So I I, in all the mayoral glory, I declare
that we should start having the less formal conversation.
So Councilor West, did you wanna say something? Well,
The reason I was whispering was
I was saying don't you think Rachel
would be really good on age
Friendly? I
mean, not to burden Rachel,
but it's that I, the open space acquisition
isn't meeting so much right now.
I mean, there's not anything really hot
and you're doing a good job on that.
And so that's not taking a huge
amount of your time. And maybe, oh
No, I definitely would like to stay with both.
Yeah. As far as age friendly goes, I'm just basically the,
uh, get the scene, the GRU guy, you know what I mean?
So I, I make sure all the buckets are delivered
and I help out at all the, uh, packing of the emergency kits
and all that stuff.
So, I mean, as far as the meetings go,
you're more than welcome to, more than welcome to have that.
Okay. So for the city clerk's clarification,
we are leaving you Richard Matthews
and we are adding Rachel Coleman to age friendly.
Correct. Okay.
Yeah, I go to meetings and he does the work too.
You Know what, why don't we take her from the top?
Would that work for people? Yep. Yep.
Using the order as our list to kind of work our way down,
starting with the bike PET advisory committee.
Counselor Walker, you're wishing to stay there? Yes, please.
Thank you very much. The cable TV folks,
we have Misha, we have the dotted line
and we have Dick Matthews.
Sure. And what does the dotted line mean That a
resident could join this, that a member of council, a member
of another member of council can join,
Meet a lot, don't they? Isha?
Yeah. Council,
We've yet to meet, if you'd like to join us
in not meeting, this is a great committee to be part of.
Do we have anyone who'd like
to join the MEETINGLESS meetings? No one else.
May I ask a question? Yes.
Is there a requirement anywhere
that we have three counselors, I guess there are a lot
of unappointed seats
and I just wonder about this vacancy appearing every time on
the list of appointments in our
It, it doesn't, we do these appointments once a year,
But is it up to three, uh, counselors
or is it that we really should have three counselors?
That's a question. It's three.
So if there is a, if there is a dotted line on there
except for the eco main, which just changed in September
to two seats, it would be a vacancy for a counselor to fill.
The only resident seat is the jet port.
So it sounds like we are looking
to replace the dotted line with a real life counselor.
If we don't,
it will appear on this appointment calendar for the entire year.
No, not that one. No, no, not that one.
But, but I'll say again, like this is a really low
and we're, we're probably gonna hear about it,
but the, so thus far this has been a really low, uh,
stress committee.
We really haven't met and I've been chair for four years
And I've been on it for three,
so I haven't seen it either. So
It's Really for, for negotiating cable franchise
agreements and that, so it's not uncommon that it's not met.
Right. Just for clarification, what is the purpose
of this, uh, board?
Exactly what Scott just said For negotiating
cable franchise agreements.
Okay. Should we hear from our staff?
I mean, somebody just came in to enlighten us.
Did you come, are you here for that?
Mo do you wanna say something about this board? Thank you.
We almost met once.
I'm, I'm just here in case like there was questions
or anything that, you know, you want answered about,
you know, the franchising process
and what, in a worst case scenario
where you actually did convene
and have to meet, it would be like, uh,
so I'm here for that if you want.
Okay. Maybe you give us three quick bullets
on what that would be like.
Alright, we've got a number
of years left on the franchise,
so we're not gonna be Rene renegotiating our franchise
within like the next two or three years.
So you should be, that's not a thing.
If there is a, there's a law that was passed that makes it
so that other entities are potentially franchisable.
So that would be something like an ISP with an app
that allows you to watch cable, but it's not cable,
but they have facilities in the public rights way.
They would need a franchise.
If the will of the council is to try
and do that, then we would need to convene.
Okay. Well Gotter, I think you saved, thank you very much.
Um, thanks. Any questions?
Any volunteers to replace the dotted line?
Alright, it seems that we are at this time.
Thank you very much, Mo. Thank you.
Want to great hat replace the dotted line
With you?
With I do I wanna replace the dotted line?
Um, I guess so. How about that?
I will, I am putting myself out there.
I nominated Elise Tipton to join this committee. I
Second that.
Okay. Alright folks, we gotta keep moving here.
Comprehensive plan Committee Counselor West
and myself would like to stay on that committee.
Open space acquisition committee.
Councilor Coleman would like to stay there. Alright.
On the Transit Advisor Committee, we are not going
to have a full discussion this evening,
but I think it is recognized by, um, the chair of
that committee and the couple of members who remain on it
that because the, um, we have are now part of the, um,
greater Portland Metro Board that, um, the usefulness of
that committee, um, that it, that it, it may need to,
it may not be an essential committee anymore.
So at some point our city clerk may guide us on
how we officially have that discussion, um, and,
and take care of that.
But for now we don't need to do that. Um, may
I ask a question? Yes.
I did wanna ask about the transit advisory committee
and other committees, if there was a point
or what the process was to actually review all of the city
boards committees that we just discussed the budget process
for, and which are active, inactive, needed,
unneeded, et cetera.
Well, welcome to the council.
Thank you Mary here. Um,
If you'd like to have a workshop on
that fellow, the poem, please. It would be
A workshop. Be a workshop
discussion. Yeah, be a workshop discussion.
And maybe one we need to have, and also I think just
because we will need to, um, some of
that discussion is gonna be naturally occurring
during the budget process when we see who's coming forward
and saying we are active, we need, we would like
to be budgeted, et cetera.
So, but a workshop, a great statement.
In fact, I almost thought that we had that in the workshop.
We proper, do we still? No, we have the workshop. We Okay.
All right. Well, um,
it sounds like it's an ongoing discussion
and the city clerk, I just do wanna say
that Jessica has this year taken on committees
and has been very much sorting through things
and getting things a little clearer if you wanna
respond at all now.
But I don't wanna put you on the spot.
We have assessed it and the transit advisory one is the
one that's up for discussion right now
because we have been approximately,
almost a year now with Metro.
So we wanted to reevaluate that one.
So that would likely be the next one that would come up
for our workshop discussion.
May I, may I follow up? Yes, you may.
In light of reading the city rules that we are going
to be discussing later around workshops, I would like
to explore with anyone who's willing
to explore if there are other pathways to bring this forward
for discussion outside of a council based workshop request.
Especially given our workshop schedule, which I think is
through the next budgeting mm-hmm.
Discussion season.
It tends to fill up. I'll, I will end my comments.
Yes. And it could be that there is another way.
So thank you very much.
Um, do you wanna just quickly guys go down? Well, nevermind.
Let's just stay in order. Okay. Fair Hearing Board.
We have Misha Pride, Natalie West and Richard Matthews.
Stay the same. Thank you. Age friendly.
We have already discussed me, Rachel and,
and Counselor Matthews Mahoney City Center,
um, counselor Matthews
and Counselor Walker would like to stay on that committee.
Yes. All good. Now we're on our regional committees,
the GP Cog General Assembly, I
that is really attending an annual meeting.
It's not, it's more than that. It's
One meeting in sort of the late, almost summer May.
Yes. Um, it's a great meeting. It's really interesting.
You hear from a lot of different cities about successes
that they're having, what they're doing.
Right. You can learn a lot, um, from that one meeting.
It's a great experience
and you get to sort of mingle
with leaders from other communities.
So it's, it's, you know, um, a good ex.
It's just a really good experience.
And I just wanna ask Councilor Pride, isn't it true
that even if on our council you're not specifically on this
committee, you can til still attend the
Assembly? You can absolutely attend.
You're just not a
voting member of the assembly.
So regardless, you can go.
Um, and even if I'm not on this committee, I go,
'cause I'm the president of GP Cog right now.
Um, but I, I do want to be a voting member of the assembly.
So
Does someone else on our council wish
to be a voting member of this assembly?
My counselor Scott,
Having been passed over for the cable committee.
Great. Appreciate your support for the GC. Wow.
You could have I, that was a joke. Sorry.
Yes, it's fine. Oh gosh.
We're gonna have some fun this year. Alrighty.
We have Misha Pride, Carter Scott, Elise Tipton,
and Richard Matthews.
Okay. GP Cog Metro Coalition.
Um, that is something that I have not attended,
but I believe that my name is there
because it's something that the mayor attends. Yes.
Typically. Um, I've been on that for the last two years.
Uh, but, and I'm happy to step off.
Um, but what I will say about that committee is that
they're sort of examining its purpose right now.
And so while you are gonna be our official member,
I'm still gonna attend the next one,
probably more in my capacity, this president,
but also having been on the
committee and had that experience.
So, uh, we, we will be working on figuring out, uh,
what to do next with that committee.
And, uh, you're absolutely welcome.
As the member, you should be there, so, but I'll be there to
Alright. Thank you
very much. Counselor Pride. Alright.
Um, no discussion about that.
Greater Portland Transit District Board Metro,
all of the folks listed.
Linda Cohen, Steven Riley, Gabe Faulkner, Macklin,
and Josh Renny, um, would like to stay in place.
One thing that has been suggested is
that we have some clarification on the length of the term
that the person is occupying.
Um, uh, Linda Cohen shared with me that, um,
the members who serve with our South Portland folks on the,
um, transit board have generally been appointed
for three year terms.
So we could discuss, if that seems appropriate.
Um, but how we exactly
and procedurally do it, you'll have to help me
with Counselor West.
Uh, I guess this is really a question for the court.
Are there, is there any language
in something establishing the Metro Board about
what the representatives, who they're supposed to be?
I do not have a copy of the agreement. I
Don't believe so. No. There, there's not,
they, they say they prefer at least
one of 'em, uh,
be a city counselor even more would be great.
But it's not required. Okay.
And that is the position when Linda took it,
that she was occupying.
Yeah. And they also like to have a one key staff member,
which in this case, obviously the assistant city manager
being on there, um, is helpful.
Mm-hmm. Um, okay. Council rest? Yes.
Well, I'm just thinking, uh, just bring out to the,
to everyone else for thoughts.
We we're on this Metro Ward
and then also on Eco Main,
where traditionally it's been an active city counselor.
And I, I don't have any trouble
with having these experienced people
who are former counselors,
but it might be useful to ask that every,
I don't know whether we wanna say six months
or every year or something.
They give us some kind of a feedback on what's going on.
I, because Okay. He's, he doesn't whisper, he writes notes.
Excuse me, while I read this.
I mean, if other people think that's a good idea,
what I'm a little bit troubled about is I,
especially the Eco Maine, for example,
where they've got a major new state-of-the-art
recycling facility coming online.
And I just think it would be useful to get the good,
the feedback about what's going on, what's happening,
what kind of questions there are.
And I know they're doing the, um, producer requirements
for the recycling, the materials.
And I just,
I'm a little worried about some of these committees.
Just, I don't have any trouble with the people.
'cause they're great people and they know what they're doing
and it's wonderful, they're committed.
But I don't want us to lose, I don't want the city
to lose track of what's going on.
And I think what Council West is trying to say is
that she'd like 'em to come forward every three months
with some type of report.
Um, anyone else want to make any comments about that
or other matters relating to these appointments?
I do think that having some clarity as we grapple
with the committees that are out there
and who's on them, to make sure that we have a good sense of
policies that may need to be developed
around if there is a council on the board
or if not present, you know what I mean?
That sort of communication mm-hmm.
I think would be very helpful. So,
Um, on the matter of how long the appointments are,
how do we address that?
It would be an order that we would put
before counsel for a decision.
Okay. So they wanna set that, the term for
the greater Portland metro seats are three year term.
So it would be two more for all of them. Right.
'cause they've done their year term
Kind of basically. So
the first order when we merged with Metro was
that we would make the appointments for a counselor,
a representative, a resident,
which ended up being Gabe from our transit advisory,
and then a staff in person.
And the fourth seat was filled
by a former counselor at the time.
So we did wanna make sure we had representation,
although it was not specifically required by Metro
and that was a separate order
and then it was added to our annual appointments.
So we would simply need to update the
order and say that there's a term.
Gotcha. Anyone else? Yes,
I have a question. So
has the decision been made that we get reports
from the committee so
that even though there isn't a counselor,
that we know what's being discussed and what's happened?
I think in the past the decision has not been made,
but we're talking about it.
You know, now it's a good idea. That's
Very good idea.
And then would then pre, we would not have
to have a counselor there if we're getting regular reports.
Mm-hmm. Yes. Um, And we could keep those good people.
Yes, we absolutely could.
Um, I think that,
um, how can I say this?
If it wasn't Linda, um, it might be
something to consider that if that seat belongs
to a counselor, it belongs to a counselor.
But it is former Counselor Cohen,
who we know understands the importance
of making sure a council has the information it needs.
So I'm pretty com I'm very comfortable with asking her
to stay in that position.
And I know that she wants to,
and I, um, understand that the,
the transit board may even ask her
to join their executive committee.
So obviously they're respecting the job that she's doing.
Um, it seems to me that it would be a good idea to ask
for a report back from the transit district board, um,
and ask for some regular reporting.
Maybe three months. Makes sense. Maybe it's four months.
Makes sense. Over and above that.
I also think, um, that we're coming due for maybe a, a,
an update on how's the metro relationship going?
What, how is this, we, you know, we had some ideas of
how it would improve service to South Portland residents.
Um, can can we have some talk about that?
Can we put that as a future agenda item?
I don't think it needs to be a workshop,
but I wonder how we could get some kind of presentation of,
you know, an update.
They're coming to you next year, in
Fact, next year.
Well, I won't get to sit in this seat next to you,
Scott. Or do you mean
2020 Next year as in like February. February.
Oh, excellent. Well say no more. Yeah.
Um, and in what form are they coming to
Us? Uh, it is a
workshop because there's gonna be some,
a workshop discussion about future expansion
and may have monetary implications.
So they want to, so, but part of that will be here's
how the service is, here's
what we've analyzed, here's what we think.
Maybe going forward you can do.
Well, great minds think alike. Yes. Thank you very much.
Unfortunately, one of the great minds hasn't looked
ahead at the schedule enough.
Apparently. So. All right. Packed policy board. Scott.
Sounds like a lonely opportunity, but you're keeping it.
Yes. Yes. Alright.
PAC's, regional Transportation Advisory Committee.
Melissa is staying there.
PAC's Regional Traffic Management System subcommittee.
Melissa has more fun.
MMA legislative policy committee.
That is Scott as our voting member, I would like
to continue serving as the alternate.
Um, it is a good learning experience
and if there is not any objection there we are.
Um, main service center coalition seems
to have my name next to that.
I don't really, I need to hear more.
That's our also male
Role. That's just something
that the mayor
automatically gets to do.
Alright, thank you. Um, and Scott, you're on that now.
We're at the Eco Maine Board of Directors.
We have, um, a resident, Linda Boudreaux
who has said she'd like to continue.
Melissa is on that. And we have room for a counselor.
Do we have an interested counselor?
Oh wait, again, this would be, yeah, this is
The one we weren't filling.
I thought this Can be an alternate person if we would
like to, but Eco Mains has reduced to two
Seats Correct.
Of September. Well that dotted line has thrown me
because I did know that, um, we had an interested counselor.
So,
Um, can I just say that Linda Boudreaux,
of course is a former counselor, mayor, everything.
She's been doing this for a really long time. Mm-hmm.
I've gone a couple times when she's given notice
to the council that there were things that were
of importance being considered
and she, she's very, she just, she should stay in the role
because she's really good at, at it and she understands it.
But I do feel
that we should get regular reports about what's going on
because there's a lot
of important stuff going on with Eco Maine.
Um, And I mean, I don't mind if she just comes
and stands up
and says it for three minutes or five minutes or something.
I don't, it doesn't necessarily have to be in writing.
But I do believe that we as counselors
and our community needs to understand
how we're on the forefront of recycling
and different things that are going on on
with waste management and
Right. Um,
well Ken, just
because I don't have the historic knowledge of this,
when Linda started serving, was she serving in the council
seat at that point?
Yes. Yes.
So has it, it had been in the past
that it was a counselor who did that.
We also had a counselor, Linda Cohen served on it as well.
Yeah, correct. That's why the doted line. That's
What I meant. I'm sorry,
Cohen. Right. I,
Because they changed the rules now.
I mean, I was thinking of volunteering for myself
'cause I do think it's really interesting.
Yeah. But there's
Some formula that dictates membership
and I think they, they've either grown
or some, I can't remember what it was,
but we, we no longer have those numbers.
Alright. So seeing this dotted line here, it's really,
that's not really true.
We don't really need to No.
Melissa Hutchins informed you when this was Okay.
Featured that we have been reduced to two seats.
Alright. Unless what the rules say,
unless the rules say a counselor.
That's why it's useful to know what the rules
of ego main say for example.
But we did get the communication from Linda Boudreaux
that you'd like to continue serving.
Okay. Um,
There's a lot also, isn't there a lot of changes
that are coming up at Eco Maine that the people
that have been involved in it, am I correct in that?
You are correct in that was why when the space became
available after Jim Galey stepped down,
that we put Melissa Hutchins in that seat
because of those significant changes
that were coming. Correct.
Okay. Thank you. You're welcome.
May I ask a question? Please.
As a board of directors for Eco Maine, I assume
that those meetings are public if counselors wanted to join,
but this is about whether or not we have two voting seats on
the board of directors that would be appointed by council.
Is that correct?
I believe it is correct. Um,
and that, that there are subcommittees
that people also can join.
It is the indication, right?
There's also subcommittees that whomever we're sending
to the board of directors, they can be parts of, um,
this one just does seem a little tiny bit murky.
Um, it sounds like we need more information
from Eco Maine. Okay.
I'm looking as we're talking,
but I can certainly put a notation
if I can't find it this evening. Talk
To Linda.
Me. Excuse me. Yeah. You talk to Linda at all?
No, no, no, no. I didn't.
Maybe you guys could have a conversation.
I thought it would be helpful for both of you actually. I
Mean, if she wa if there's only two seats, I think
that we keep the two members
that are serving now in those seats,
I don't think that would replace anybody.
But if there was a third counselor or a third seat.
Oh, oh, I see what you're saying.
I would love to, I misunderstood. I don't wanna replace it.
I misunderstood what you were saying.
Yes. So it sounds like we may leave the slate this
way tonight.
Um, but that we would like the city clerk
to find out if Eco Maine is saying it should be a
sitting city counselor.
So, alright.
Can we move on to Lawn Creek Watershed Management,
district board of Directors.
We've got, uh, several staff members it looks like. And Mr.
Matthews's. Correct. It seems like you are the o the person
that we need to find out if you wish to stay on that. I
Would be staying there. Yes.
Okay. Anyone wanna arm wrestle? Richard Matthews?
No, I don't see anyone raising their
opportunity. I was gonna
Throw it down. Trust me
Jeff. Okay.
Good to know.
Um, on the Jetport Noise Advisory Committee,
councilor West, you wish to stay there?
And is this a real dotted line? It is.
Currently, it's currently filled with a resident.
That resident has not indicated if they're going
to remain for 2026.
So I wanted it to be public knowledge for residents.
If they're interested that they can contact my office
as well as for counselors to be aware in case there is
anyone of interest that they know of.
Okay. Then we're fine there. Um,
Um, okay. The little
bit of confusion here is to make sure
that everybody realizes
that the way the jetport is required is
that you have one counselor
or a representative of a counselor and one citizen.
And so the little dot actually isn't applicable tonight
because we're just mostly talking about counselors
and and staff.
And the term is indefinite.
And so the per, since we don't have the resignation
yet from the citizen rep,
or it's not clear if when the citizen rep is gonna resign,
um, in a way the dot doesn't, no change There
Doesn't really, okay. It's
Not an annual appointment.
It's a indefinite appointment.
Thank. Although I, I do think in light of, with
what the mayor said earlier tonight,
that maybe when we appoint the citizen
to the Jeff Fort next time we should have some kind
of a term because the, I know, well I won't go into it all,
but people have served on that
for a very long time without any kind of review in the past.
Okay. Okay. Thank you very much for that explanation.
That's helpful. Um, on the waterfront,
allow Alliance Councilor West, you have been serving.
Um, I thought that I heard we had another counselor also
interested, but I'm not certain.
Yeah, that one there's a, a transition.
Okay. So are
we okay people?
You must be, she's pointing. Thank you. Alright.
Councilor Scott, you would like
to serve on the Waterfront Alliance?
Yes. If it pleases the mayor And the council.
Well, I so like to be pleased. Um, alright.
The, um, waterfront Alliance. We have a change order.
We have a order. This is a change order changing there, so
Thank you Natalie.
All right. Well we've seen city clerk
to have add done a little of adding and subtraction.
Um, do we need to now vote?
Uh, do we need a motion to do these,
to vote on this as amended?
Yes. And do you think you're following all the amendments?
I do. I do follow. Alright, we're good.
And everybody else fairly clear?
I think technically I think you still technically need
to open it to public comment.
Yes. Before we vote, wait, don't you move there a question.
Now we do public comment
and then there seems to be a question
On the jet court. Can
we just add Councilor Walker as my alternate?
Because she has been active on that one too
and it's been really helpful.
So, okay. So we create an alternate physician.
Thanks. I
Would like to point out, I'm just looking at the eco main
bylaws and the municipal officers
of each municipality have the right to appoint an alternate.
So if we did want to have an alternate listed
for Eco Main, we could do so.
They do not have a requirement.
It seems that it has to be a, a current municipal officer
to serve in this seat.
I know. Nate. Council Walker.
Well, I Would like
to hear if Councilor West is interested
'cause it sounds like that's something
that you're pretty passionate about as well.
Well, nope, it's okay. I'm happy with what I'm doing.
So if you, I think you as an alternate.
And I also think because eventually,
I mean we're all very optimistic that you're gonna be around
for a long time and eventually former Mayor Boudreaux
will move on.
And so it's great to have sort of an apprentice and,
Okay, Well now I want to know what he said.
Meetings, everybody behave.
Um, alrighty.
That served as our questions from the counselors.
Um, now is there a public comment on this item? It's rather,
Uh, Unwieldy item.
The item being who,
which counselors are serving on these various committees.
Any public comment? Seeing none.
Public comment on this item is closed. And move for bass.
Thank you. Councilor Matthews seconded
by Counselor Walker.
Yes, I do know who you are. Um, can we all in favor?
It is unanimous as amended
and filled in and scratched out.
Um, we have made progress on this item circles, city clerk.
Can you now read for us order number?
Where are we on one 11?
Order number 1 11 25 26.
Acceptance of grants and donation passage requires majority
vote this evening.
We have three before us.
We have two for our South Portland Police Department from
the Bureau of Highway Safety.
One is for $5,472 for the 26 drug.
Uh, forensic phlebotomist training
and call outs for OUI arrest.
The other is for 4,725 for impaired driving enforcement.
And the last is for our age friendly organization
that has $1,500 coming in for their smart home tech
pilot project for Betsy Ross House, which is
provided by the housing Authority.
Nice. Any comments or we're on questions?
Any questions? Any members
of the public want to make comments?
Nope. Public comment closed. Any questions?
What's the wish of the council? We gotta open up the public.
Oh, I did. She did. I didn't hear it.
You were writing passing notes. It was a flash.
Thank you, council. Thank you.
Do we have a second for passage? Councilor Walker.
Thank you. Um, a vote. All in favor.
Thank you. That is unanimous.
And now we can move to the workshop discussion.
Can you, who would, who is introducing the, well,
I don't know, it doesn't need much of an introduction,
but would you like to introduce
or It's Scott introducing. Thank you.
Okay. So, um, every year council takes a look at its rules
to see if there's anything that, um,
you feel needs tweaking.
Uh, so tonight's an opportunity for counselors.
Any counselor can propose a rule
and if it gets a majority support,
then uh, we would come back.
And, um, uh, at this point it says, um, December 9th, but
because we missed the packet deadline
because we postpone this meeting, it would be January 6th,
but we would come back with those amendments.
Staff are asking that you can consider at least,
um, two changes.
Both are related to the same thing in rule four and 34.
And that is the deadline by which, um, agenda
and workshop requests must be received in order
to make essentially the next meeting.
Uh, right now the deadline is Wednesday at noon.
We're requesting that those items be received, uh,
Tuesday at noon instead to give staff more time to,
to review them, especially if position papers
and analysis are required.
Um, just as an FYI I'm moving this deadline
up for staff as well.
Uh, once we convert to the upgraded and newest
and greatest board docs
or whatever they're gonna call it next diligent, I think,
um, yeah, just
because we, we are, um, running up against too little time
to review agenda items
before we push them out to the public.
So, um, anyway, that's, uh, that's it.
And um, but we're happy to hear if there are other changes
that uh, you want see.
Thank you very much. Um, I think maybe we can move
to comments, comments being,
what are the rule changes you might want to see
Comments on Council. Yes.
Thank you. Councilor West.
I think to, I think, uh, I'd like to lobby
for Tuesday at four 30
instead of Tuesday at noon.
I, I understand where staff is coming from,
but some, it's hard if
nobody's here on Friday
and then you start on Monday trying
to see what's in the agenda, what's coming out
and you work on it.
And I just, I mean,
if other people wanna have a Tuesday at noon,
okay, I'll deal with it.
But I just think Tuesday at four 30 would be
a good compromise.
Anyone else? And did everybody
understand exactly the shape shift
that Scott's describing? Okay, council,
I'm actually gonna back council West on that
because we have so many Monday holidays.
Yep. You know, you guys have closed Friday
then we'll close Monday.
And believe it
or not, we're gonna actually have to put an exception to
that because last year twice we had a holiday on Monday
and there was snowstorms on Tuesday.
So you're looking at five days
and we're not able to, you know what I mean?
And we can still put it in,
but you guys aren't looking on it.
You know what I'm saying? Mm-hmm. Am
I done? And also you, oh,
sorry, did I cut you off? We're having a
Very difficult night.
We have to have different assigned seats.
I, um, I, yeah,
'cause I usually do try to talk to somebody on staff
before I come up with something
and I, I just think it's,
that's a really pretty tight deadline.
Yeah. So just to finish up with that, I mean,
seriously though, like, so you have,
well, like for example,
this year you have a holiday on a Thursday,
so we're closed Thursday, Friday
and then yeah, I realize you're back open on Monday, but,
and then in January, February
we have two Monday holidays.
I'm, I'm just concerned with the snow and everything else.
So at least give us till four 30 on Tuesday
and give staff till four 30 on Tuesday.
And just keep an open mind where, uh,
if a snowstorm does happen on a Tuesday
that you might give us, if the way for closed Monday
and Tuesday, you might give us till noontime on
Wednesday as an exception.
I don't know. I just think
that Tuesday at four 30 would probably be better
than Tuesday at noontime.
Can I? Yes, please. Um, Mr.
City Manager does that, does
that four hour window make a big difference?
Yeah, it, it's better. Um,
obviously the issue is if staff are going home
that night at five, it gives them, you know,
three hours the next morning different.
So it's, it's a little less time,
but it's better than, than what it is now.
And I'll just just say, to be fair, last year
we didn't close for one storm.
Uh, we delayed an opening once
On a Tuesday Maybe, but Huh.
But the person that council's gonna be talking to,
you're not gonna be calling, you know,
like Milan up necessarily
or someone you're gonna be calling me saying, Hey,
I wanna get something on the agenda.
I think you all know I'm here on holidays
and on snow days and things like that too.
So, um, but,
but I'm okay if you all wanna do four 30
that is better than Wednesday at noon.
So I'm good, I'm good with that. Can
I, can I ask just another client?
So was, um, I just wanna make sure that we're all aware
of the kind of impetus behind moving it back
to from Wednesday to Tuesday.
Does it make that much of a
On on some items? It
doesn't. Some, it's not a big deal.
If someone wants to do a proclamation declaring, you know,
September is Childhood Cancer Awareness month, uh,
that's not an issue, uh, to pick on a counselor.
Last year when we received that, you know,
basically 1150 on a Wednesday, a whole thing to send
to the 10 companies that required some significant analysis
by legal and others.
And we did not have time
to prepare a position paper for that.
Um, and so an extra day would've been a little bit
helpful on, on, on that.
It still might not have been enough, but, um, it's just an,
and this isn't, again, this is something
that we're expecting of staff, um, as well
because when I get things from staff
that sometimes I'm not even aware are coming, I need
to be able to provide you all a good analysis in my position
paper of, of what's coming.
And if I get something on Wednesday at noon
and I have afternoon meetings that day
and I can only get to it Thursday morning, um,
and the packet has to be released that day, like I, I'm,
I'm not giving you or the public enough benefit
of, of staff review.
So, um, so that's why I'm pushing it up for staff.
And I thought it would be helpful
for the rare occasions when there's something
that's a little bit, um, you know, for the most part, like,
you know, workshop requests not a big deal.
We don't have to really do much prep for them
because you all are just saying, yeah, we want
to have a workshop or not.
But there are a few other instances
where it's like an extra day
would be, would, would be helpful
If I may speak, Oh, excuse me.
Hold on for a second. C Councilor Pride? Yes, please.
Thank you. Um, so as Scott alluded to, this is coming
because Diligent where our board doc system is upgrading
to a platform called community.
Um, in reviewing the process for the agenda, I did speak
with Scott regarding if we could bump up the timeframe.
Reason being is everything gets bumped
and delayed just slightly.
If we do have something that comes in at 1159, Scott
and his staff need to review it, get the material posted,
and then I am not able to actually proof
or prepare to make sure procedurally our agenda is
set before it goes out.
So this not only gives Scott A. Little bit of wiggle room,
but it does for myself as well to make sure
that we are not running into erroneous documents
that are uploaded or procedural pieces
that are not being documented
or processed correctly on the agenda.
So it just gives us each a little bit at each stage
of the agenda being processed.
So I do agree four 30 does help both Scott
and I in that process,
but that's why it was originally noon on Tuesday gives
everybody equivalent time
to make sure everything is prepared
and we can catch those last minute pieces
that do need to get added in.
One thing I'll just say too, one of the things that we,
we do here, you see all these orders have numbers.
Um, if the, if the agenda gets moved around,
those numbers have to change
and we have to go in and change all the orders.
And so we try to keep them blank
until we at least have the meeting with the mayor.
Um, and, and then they go back and get filled in.
But you, you wouldn't, um, imagine,
but it's just kind of a, a frustrating process
for staff and ordering those.
I've said let's just get rid of the order numbers.
I don't really know what functional purpose they serve,
but, uh, I, that was, um,
that was something we thought we'd bring up
after Linda Cohen left the council.
Um, who I think Mayor I, excuse me, councilor Pride.
Um, yeah, so I think to basically what, um,
the city managers just mentioned, I mean,
we're talking about workshop requests which appear on a
list, that's an attachment to an item.
So we're not mixing around the agenda at all if people get
their workshop requests in later or whatever.
Um, so I I, and
but I do understand the wish to get them in earlier.
So I I agree with, uh, counselor West and Matthews.
I think that Tuesday at four 30 is a good compromise.
Um, and you know,
'cause workshop requests don't really,
I mean if you're the counselor making the requests,
you might want to get a little more information,
but you don't necessarily need to, you can just propose
what you, the thing you want to talk about in a very,
you're supposed to do in a very short one
minute sort of way.
And then if you get two counselors to support that it's on
and there's no staff requirement,
then usually staff doesn't pre present
during our workshop requests.
Hmm. So it's not like we're we're talking about things
that require a lot of prep time. I think so.
Councilor Matthews, well Council West was Counselor West.
Okay. This will surprise you, but I was about to say,
and I will say I didn't realize we were changing the system.
I didn't realize there's gonna be
issues with this new system.
In light of that, I would just back off
and say let's go with
what the clerk and the manager wants to do.
Because there's always going to, with startups
and changes, it's gonna be hard for you.
And so let's just do what you want.
And if you know,
and if in a year from now we're used to the new system
and I gets in the way we can, I'll complain again.
Well a voice, we can count, count on. I
Guess I have a question about if the new system is really
gonna impact the workshop piece.
'cause that's not like we have to reorder agendas
or anything for our workshop.
I think we mostly brought up the new system, not
that it's necessarily gonna make things harder.
Um, it was just, hey, we're having this transition,
this is a good kind of point to say things are gonna start
to be, um, do earlier.
So I don't wanna give the impression to make you all think
that, hey, a new system, that's why we need more time,
you know, so again, four 30, whether it's board docs
or this new system, um, you know, would've been fine.
You know, noon is better, but four 30 would've been fine.
It's really the just that extra little bit
of time to, to look at things.
You're right. Workshop requests really aren't,
we don't have to do as much.
I have to technically say, do I think this is gonna be a lot
of staff time required for it?
I hardly ever fill that information out
because I think, you know, I think if it's gonna be a big
request, I'd let you know that verbally.
But, um, uh, it's different for agenda items.
Alright, is there anyone else who wants to ask about this?
We're good on this. Proposed.
Any other rule changes proposed from the city staff?
Okay, now we're on councilors. Councilor West.
Looks like you've got something where, where
Do we end up? I don't
know if I asked one or four 30.
If you wanted to withdraw that, that's fine.
I think I heard a couple others say they wanted four 30.
So I think I heard the majority were good Tuesday at four
30. But did you only
say everybody else? Did you just say that?
Because I had said it
and if I say it's okay with me, I'm going
to just, it's fine with me.
Let them, let's go back to Tuesday at
Noon. My my impression
is that people agreed with you
because you made a good case.
But I, we haven't voted, we haven't discussed
what three o'clock could do or, you
Know. Good. What's the,
Anything like that? Don't
Call the question or something.
No, we don't do that Because this is informal.
We'll get over this, but the reason I said four 30 was just
so it would be by the end of the day
and when they came to work the next day they'd have it.
That was my thinking.
Is that helpful enough or do you want,
or is it really that you'd like to experiment with noon?
And you're asking that of us?
Uh, I, I'm, I'm good with, uh, we're good with four 30.
We're good. We'll see how that works. Okay.
And if that becomes a problem
again, we'll bring it up next year.
Alright. So it sounds like we'll put a rule change in
at least we we're not voting on this tonight,
but that sounds like that will be one
of the draft rule changes.
Anything else from the city? I thought
that you had mentioned two things.
Uh, it was the same thing.
It was just, those are different rules that applies
to number four and 34.
Okay. Thank you so much.
Alright, let's, um, get onto councilors suggestions for
what might be a rule change.
Councilor West, it looked like you were
about to say something.
Yes. Um, the only one that I think we need
to change is council Rule 18, which is the, uh, request
for reconsideration.
And the current rule is simply just straight out
of Robert's rules of order.
And it's, uh, in my memory, we've only had one motion
to reconsider since I've been on the council is
very rare, but maybe two.
Uh, the situation that happened recently,
I pointed out at the time was it ended up being,
I think it's very useful
that Councilor Tipton told the staff that she was gonna move
to reconsider and it appeared on the agenda.
I mean, I think it's useful for the council to know
and for the people to know
that somebody's gonna make a motion to reconsider.
But as you remember, what happened is it showed up on the
agenda just reconsideration of X, which is not
accurate because the way it has to work is
a particular council
or in the prevailing side has to move for reconsideration.
So, and, and it shouldn't have to be on the agenda
because you have the right
to walk into a meeting without having said anything
to anybody and to move for reconsideration.
So I I was gonna suggest that we leave rule 18 as it is,
but that we add at the end.
Uh, if a counselor intends to make a motion
to reconsider at the next succeeding regular meeting,
I'm not sure whether we say they or he
or she, whatever anymore may inform the clerk,
may inform the clerk
and the matter shall be noticed on the agenda under,
uh, action on all the new business
as quote counselor blank intends to move
for reconsideration of blank.
And I think that takes care of it in a way that
is consistent with Robert's rules, gives notice
to the public, provides everybody the applicable rights
and just is a better way to proceed in the future.
Can I ask a question? And the may word leaves it open so
that if I walked in tomorrow
and wanted to make a motion, I could
Right.
So you have any, and you can decide at any time
and you don't have to tell anybody that you intend to do it.
And yeah, May's vital.
Okay, thank you. May I ask a, a question
or I guess I'm, I'm weighing what you say
and I am thinking about the fact that we promised members
of the public that they will see an agenda for the meeting,
um, and it will be delivered
to them in a certain timely way.
What if the counselor doesn't make a decision
to reconsider something
or to bring the motion for reconsideration until well
after it's that's published for, you know,
where are we then?
Do we then do we then have members of the public saying, oh,
uh, that that isn't how, I don't know.
It does not happen that often. You're right.
Well I think that's
what Councilor Walker the point Councilor Walker was making,
that you have the right,
any counselor on prevailing side has the right
to walk into a council meeting at the next exceeding council
meeting and make a motion to reconsider.
We either say that it's never gonna go on the agenda
because the way it was noticed was not correct
or yes, we carry out the responsibility that I think we have
to the public and to each other if some counselor knows
and that we give notice
and this is an appropriate way to do it.
And conversely, if you don't know, then
you don't have to give notice.
As a matter of respect there, I've seen people,
Councilor Scott keeps politely
and correctly raising her hand. So let us
Recognize first time for everything.
Thank you. Um, I, I think to,
to answer your question, if a counselor actually wishes
for something to be on the agenda,
and it is appropriately noted on the agenda as,
as Natalie mentioned, which I think is correctly noted,
I believe it would just be up to them at the meeting when
that agenda item comes up to say, I'm I'm,
I'm not gonna move for reconsideration on that point
Where they Are. I, well, I guess
Just to, if they, if they do, if they no longer wish to,
and I appreciate that the public might wanna know that,
but the public doesn't necessarily know whether
or not somebody might move
for reconsideration if it's not noticed.
So I don't know that there's a, you know,
I guess what I, I guess my feeling on this is that
you make a good point that the last time, sort
of the first time any of us have seen this done, it looked
to the public as if it was a done deed,
that council will absolutely do a reconsideration.
And the only thing,
and that wasn't incorrect, what had been decided is
that a counselor would bring forward a motion
for reconsideration.
So now you're saying that, that that fact that
that motion may happen
should be something we alert the public to.
And I don't have a problem with that.
I am just saying that in some cases
the counselor might decide that too late in the game and it,
and it wouldn't get to the agenda
and so that that's what would happen. So,
But that's the word may, that's what I just said.
Yeah, that's the word. And what Casa Walker said also. Yeah,
May No, I understand that the May is there,
I do understand that I'm just,
and I also don't think that it's going to happen
so frequently that we'll have members of the public saying,
Hey, this time it didn't get on the agenda.
So I don't know, I guess it's time
Alterna, it should never be on the agenda.
You know, just follow the rules,
Robert rules at the next thing and make a motion.
But I was saying the way it appeared on the agenda,
I thought, well I've never really seen that before.
But it is a useful thing to tell both the other,
to give a heads up so that it is not,
and also then there's no whispering
behind the scenes about counselor's gonna
do this, counselor's gonna do that.
It's a way of being straight with the public if
the counselor knows.
Okay. Does anyone else wanna say anything?
Because I think even though we're not voting, um,
we will be voting eventually.
So if there are any counselors who
really don't like this change at all, speak up now.
Alright. Okay. Thanks.
Anything else, councilor Walker?
So rule I wanna talk about,
I think it would fall under Rule 19
about the other maybe third rail, um,
public comment over Zoom.
I'd like to have that discussion.
I just laughing it, uh, counselor Matthews.
Um, but I do think that it's something
that we need to consider.
Um, I'd like to explore how we could do that in a way
that is safe and controllable.
I understand that it's not something that is easy to do,
but I I think that there are communities that
do this successfully.
And so I don't know how many there are,
but I think there might be some.
Um, and there are, in Rule 19, there are already a few areas
that would, um, allow us to end.
You know, we could use them for any kind of nefarious
zoom actors, um, the subset I
and j where we could to host the meeting or,
or, um, boot them from the meeting, for lack
of a better term, to put it less eloquently.
And I understand that it is something
that this council has grappled with before.
Um, but just, you know, from my position of,
of really making things as accessible as possible,
I want to explore it.
Anyone else? I thank you very much
And we're gonna talk about it
tonight of how we would do it.
I don't know if we can do anything with the rule.
If we're, if we're gonna, we can talk about it though.
I, and just before I, before I came to this meeting tonight,
a citizen spoke to me about it.
And I know there is concern
and especially in the winter months when it's harder
for people to get out.
The conditions aren't good and people do wanna participate
and do wanna be able to speak.
I think it's very, very challenging
and I'd sort of throw it back to staff rather
than spend a lot of time on it tonight.
The que the various, the citizen
that was talking to me tonight.
I hope you're listening. So you know
that I'm giving voice to what you told me.
Didn't I said, is it possible that you could have people
register for the meeting before, say that they're going to,
um, attend, say that they wanna make a a,
um, a comment.
Is it, is it possible
that you could just have an admission kind
of requirement on the Zoom that a person would have to say
who they are and what their address is in
South Portland to get in?
I, I am just saying,
and I have to admit that I was kind of out of hand
and I said I don't see how we can do it.
And given the experience we've had in the past,
and I, I've also, I read the Bangor Daily News
and they've had a lot of problems in that part of the state
and have stopped allowing comments on Zoom quite recently.
But I just, maybe staff can have other ideas. I don't know.
'cause I, I understand the concern that participating
and encouraging people to participate is really important.
Counselor Scott, I am not sure that that would require
or would benefit from a rule change,
but that we take the time throughout this next period to,
uh, build the right path forward.
It's, it's very possible. It's very manageable.
It does take an additional, um, I believe staff
or dedicated person that is actually managing the process
and able to mute somebody,
eject somebody from the call, et cetera.
But you can not allow comments.
You can allow people to sort
of be granted a speaking opportunity.
I think the registration is helpful in terms of
identification of a person for
if they get banned indefinitely, if
that's even a possibility, but not necessarily requiring
a residency component.
I don't believe that you are required to be a resident
to speak at the public comment period.
So I think it's very possible
and I think that we should explore what it would take
to staff that and have that work appropriately.
And if we feel that once we have determined a
feasible path towards that, we can assess whether
or not an actual rule change would be warranted.
Um, I just wanna say, may I, excuse me for one second.
Yeah. Um, I just wanted you all to know
that I have brought this up with our staff members
because I also would like it to work.
Um, but now I'm going to ask Councilor Pride
to please talk about his knowledge about this
and when good order
and decorum actually isn't able to be interpreted
as in keeping with First Amendment law.
So I served as mayor
through COVID the first time I was mayor.
And so I had a lot of, we had Zoom, we had hybrid, um,
and I think we had hybrid at the beginning of my second
term as mayor too.
And I think I might be the mayor
that ended the hybrid meetings, um,
because they started getting out of hand.
Um, and I also, when I was mayor the second time,
attended Chairs in a Circle, which is a GP Cog event put on
for everybody who's you should definitely attend Mayor
Tipton because it's just a really great thing.
Um, you'll be invited, um, everybody who's a chair
of a board of, or uh, sorry, a, um, a town council
or city council may, we're one of the few
that call our chair the mayor,
but some others do, uh,
are invited to that event and it's great.
And the one we went to, um, the one I went
to was about this very topic was about what the limits
of the First Amendment are.
And one of the issues we have,
and something I definitely don't want
to take away from our public is
that we allow open public comment.
We, we have a citizen discussion, part one
and part two where we allow someone to say anything on
or off remarks about anything on or off the agenda.
So we can't mute them, we can't kick them out if they have
to cross a certain line
before we can cut them off,
whether they're in person on Zoom or whatever.
And we had an on in person person, I remember I practically,
we had to stop Ru Lu from jumping up
and, and hitting the guy.
Um, it, it was, it was terrible, but,
and I let him talk for a long time
before I realized this is someone's going to hit him
and we, I I need to cut him off for his own safety.
And that's the fighting words
exceptions of the First Amendment.
But that's a really hard line to draw
and I probably violated his rights.
Um, you know, you're, we're supposed
to give everyone the full three minutes regardless of
what they say, regardless of who they are.
Um, and Zoom offers, you know, we,
we don't have video on Zoom, but they can talk
and we cannot stop them.
And it allows people from all over the place, um,
from anywhere, like you said,
there's no residency requirement.
So they can zoom in from all over the country
and they find out that we allow open public comment
and they spread it around their, the, the dark web
or whatever, and they take advantage of it.
Yeah. And, and I think it will continue to happen
and I, I really am, I mean, I I would love it if we could
go back to that sort of more innocent time when
that wasn't happening and people were really
just participating via Zoom.
I thought it was great. I thought it was a wonderful
opportunity, but it, you know, I I've soured on it now.
I it it's too bad that it's gotten to this point.
So I, I agree that a rule change isn't really
what, what's necessary.
I, I'm happy a staff can think of something
or talk to lawyers, but my understanding is
because we allow that open public comment is in discussion,
part one and part two, there's really nothing we can do
to weed people out, cut them off, mute them, kick them out
of meetings, ban them in any way, shape or form.
We, we actually can't ban anybody from a public meeting.
Yes, they spoke ever.
Um, you know, unless they're doing something
dangerous, we can't even ban them.
We can only kick them out of that meeting.
Um, or if they're breaking our rules to a certain point,
we're supposed to ask them to leave.
But yeah.
Um, so, you know, I I just think it's something
that we'd love to have,
but I just don't think we can, we, we didn't,
we didn't take care of our nice thing very
well, not somewhat broken.
Can I ask a question on that?
So we have rule, uh, 19 I,
which is the presiding officer may cut off any commentary
that is not germane or that is scurries scurrilous, abusive
or not in accord with good order and decorum.
And then 19 J any person who shall continue
to violate these rules after warning
by the presiding officer may be ejected from the remainder
of the meeting then in progress.
So how does that, how did what you've just brought up
counteract rules I and J
Those rules are aspirational and likely unconstitutional.
That's what I, that's So do we need to remove those
Then? I think
we can have them. Okay.
It's, as long as we don't enforce them in such a way
that it's, you know, not if someone is pushing people around
or, you know, we, we can get to a point
where we can enforce them,
but there's probably a cause
of action depending on what it is.
It's just a matter of, you know, again,
I I think it's perfectly okay to have those
as aspirational rules.
Um, though maybe they put a chill on speech
and I think maybe we want
to talk to her, a lawyer about that.
But I don't know,
I don't know if anybody's thinking that
deeply at this point. I,
You, I I think it being there if, if I could speak,
allows anyone who's sitting in this chair,
and it is the rule that when you are making public comment,
you're addressing the presiding officer.
If someone comes and says, you know, so
and so who just made this comment is a j*****s
and I'm gonna punch 'em in the, I can at least say,
or anyone sitting can say, Hey, hey, hey,
you know, knock that off.
Um, I don't think that's a violation
of First Amendment speech,
but it's all a little, it's a little murky.
So that's a no to the public comment over Zoom then.
Not I, I don't think,
I personally don't wanna give up on it,
but I think we have to and,
and the registration thing has been discussed.
Yeah. What has also been discussed is
that someone could give a fake name or something,
or someone else maybe, you know, in, in trying
to promote this as a, as a way
of hearing more public comment,
somebody doesn't know they were supposed to do it.
So they get frustrated when they want
to make a public comment and can't
because they didn't register three hours before.
You know it. But I hope, I would like
to find us some way of trying it.
Could we come up with a grand experiment
and if it falls apart, we say, well,
that was an experiment. Yes. Counselor West.
Um, could we allow people to email public comments
that would be read by the clerk?
I mean, I'm thinking about how some
of the radio shows allow you
to just email in a comment.
I, I'm just, I think the worst of what's happened
with the Zoom bombing ones here has been when somebody
really gets vicious on Zoom, and
I guess, excuse me, my question,
And it's harder to do in writing,
Would the same rules apply if we say
during a meeting you may email
and the clerk will read,
then somebody emails something awful.
Is the clerk supposed to read that? I don't
Know. Yeah. But at least the clerk's
reading it instead of, oh
God, well I'm, I mean,
What if the person puts the N word in their thing
and now the clerk has to say the N word?
I mean, I, I couldn't do that. I literally couldn't do that.
I'm trying to come with No, I know, but
Yeah, I, well that's why
I told, just say I'm happy, we're happy to talk
to the mayor about Paul Boss.
Ultimately it's the council's call.
You can today without any rule change, obviously
as you know, have, have a Zoom meeting.
But you've all generally come at least,
or past councils have come to the conclusion
that it wasn't worth it.
There are things that other
communities do, like registration.
It is true. Just like when we had, um, the folks on Zoom,
they would make up names and say,
I live at number one Broadway.
There's no way to verify that.
And even if I said, well that doesn't
look like you live at one Broadway.
Someone could say, I just moved there. Of course it doesn't.
So it's not a super great protection to make sure
that the person's legitimate.
Um, but I'm certainly willing to have the conversation
with the mayor to see if there's any additional things
that, that we can do.
And, um, you know, if there are rule changes, it,
it would actually probably be to your, um,
policy on remote meeting, remote
and hybrid meetings that you would make that to,
if there was like gonna be changes to, um,
how you took public comment and things like that.
But, um, we, we can at least explore it further, um,
you know, in our weekly discussions or, or what
Have you. And do
you think that our corporate council has, or
and his colleagues have any suggestions
for having confronted this?
And
I mean Sally, Sally did a full review of this one,
you know, when the issue our former corporation council,
and it was much as to what Councilor Pride had said.
Someone gets up here
and wants to say disgusting things, uh, anti-Semitic
and anti, uh, everything
that they can unfortunately say those things.
So we're not gonna stop that.
Um, and it's, it is more prone on Zoom,
but um, there is a line.
Yes, my understand. Oh, counselor Matthews,
You know, in the meantime, I just wanna remind the public
and everybody else that, uh, until we get this figured out,
all counselors are accessible by email.
All counsels pretty much have their phone numbers out there.
Uh, I said pretty much, uh, one of the things, uh,
council Walker has added is, uh, council office hours.
Um, so it's not like anybody
that has a question about what happened tonight
or what happened last week, they, they have accessibility
to us and, and until they figure out the Zoom thing,
I just want everybody to know, I mean, that Jeff
and John Pan are here.
Okay. So, and it's cold out.
So, uh,
don't forget that important piece that it's,
it's not like we're not accessible.
So we are accessible.
Uh, I answer emails at 3:00 AM right away.
So, uh, I just want to say until we figure it out,
until the mayor and the city manager
and whoever else figures it out, it's out there.
Thank you. Thank you for saying that.
Anyone else have ideas about rules changes
that we might want to consider?
Councilor Scott? Can I
Request a table of contents please?
Okay.
Alright. Yes, I think we could do that. I
Bet we could do that.
Thank you. I don't know. That might be pretty hard.
Any others? Even with links you can click on,
it'll take you right to that section.
Oh, yeah. Oh, wow. All,
Any other suggestions, requests?
I, I did wanna ask about one quick thing.
It also has to do with public comment.
I wanna encourage as much public comment as possible,
and I'm pretending that
because we've been so encouraging, um,
we could have a situation where,
and I thought that I had seen this in rules previously,
but I might have been in school board rules
where the presiding officer has a chance to, for example,
you know, there's a hundred people here
to make public comment.
Each person wants three minutes to, in the moment be able
to say, tonight public comment is two minutes.
And that also the presiding officer could maybe say, wow,
there's 50 people here.
Um, it's some issue that has to do
with South Portland and beyond.
So of the 50 people, 30 are not from South Portland,
we're gonna prioritize hearing from South Portland first.
That kind of thing.
I, I feel like has been, is available
and should be available to a chair.
But I don't actually see it.
I think I would just go with Does anybody have anything
new to say instead of limiting?
Seriously, define new. We can't limit.
I don't, I, I, I, I, I think that's a fine line.
Us cutting people off at two minutes where we're,
we're at three minutes and, and I get what you're saying.
I mean, a hundred people come up here all the time
and say the same thing
and you're sitting there trying
to figure out if they said anything different
at all in the same sentence.
But, um, trying to do that, I think,
and then try to say, are you from South Portland?
Are you from, I mean, we've had a lot
of people from Portland and,
and when the Airbnb thing, I remember they had a lot
of people from Yarmouth, Kenny Brunswick,
everywhere coming here talking and trying to mm-hmm.
Um, so, uh, I mean, you've seen it, Misha,
you've been here a long time
and we have a lot of people that come from, I mean,
that gentleman that went off the rails that, you know,
uh, was from Portland.
Yep. You know, we had another guy standing here in front
of us with a gun in his waistband Portland.
Mm-hmm. You know what I mean?
So it's not like you can say, Hey gee, you know,
Um, councilor Matthews, I feel like, you know,
I don't have original thought.
So the two ideas that I've described,
I feel like I have read somewhere
and have heard that other councils have this
available to them.
It's not school board that had this available
to us. No,
I don't, me personally, I didn't. Oh, Natalie
Councilor West. Well,
I was just gonna print out that we do have a,
we do have a provision that we can suspend the rules
by a two thirds vote.
And one approach would be if we did get in a situation with
so many people that the mayor could ask the council,
I think it might be useful
to have council buy-in if we're gonna do something like that
and say, because of the number of people here
who wanna speak and the length of the meeting,
I would ask the council to support a motion
that we suspend the rules
and only allow two minutes, I would say.
And that would be a way to go.
So, yes.
'cause there could be counselors that feel like, hell, no,
that's not what we wanna do.
So
Yeah, that's why I Counselor Scott,
I, I believe that these rules are set
and that we owe the public our duty to listen to all
of their comments for as long as we're willing
to stand up here, just as they have been willing to stand
before us and make comments.
And unless we're willing to
reduce the public input across the board
and then make changes to allow for more as needed,
I think it would be seen as very subjective
and, um, challenging to overcome that kind
of a decision that the council would make, even if it was
by a majority for a specific issue, a specific number
of people, or a specific sort
of residency for our public input.
Mm-hmm. So I think that
unless we're gonna discuss a whole scale change to
the timing or the ability to participate,
I would encourage us not
To allow, not have those tools available.
Those tools. Yes. Okay. I second.
Alright, well we have two of you saying
we feel pretty strongly about not doing that.
And then we have Dick,
I think you saying you don't think it's necessary
and nobody else seems to be waving their hands saying
that's the greatest idea ever.
So I think I will just say we talked about
that, the end.
All right. Anything else on rules?
Rules going once, going twice.
Council West, did you meet
with a language about reconsideration?
So I can copy and paste that in.
And, and can I just also point out
that was a workshop agenda item,
which technically we do allow public comment on,
and we didn't actually open it up to public comment.
Um, well, not yet anyway. Yeah, but I
Just want to make sure, can Ken get things out of order?
I can we combine the workshop comment
with citizen discussion part two, comment?
No, no. 'cause so it's separate. All right.
Anyone want to make from members
of the public have any comments
regarding the workshop material discussions?
Please.
You got two minutes.
Used to be
Jeff Steinberg Cottage Road.
Oddly, I was going to suggest nobody mentioned in the back
and forth that if there are only say two
or three people in the audience,
you allow each of them 30
minutes. I was Okay.
Um, The other thing I, just
to recall a moment that I, uh, think we're maybe all aware
of it, but didn't come up about public comment.
There was a time when the comprehensive plan committee, um,
being inundated, relatively speaking, uh,
determined as I remember, that they were going
to cut off public comment at, uh, a moment in time.
I think it was nine o'clock in the evening.
And that had, uh,
I think they're still recovering from that.
I, that what several of you said I think is correct.
You can, you can err on the side of,
let's call it efficiency, in a way that you'll end up,
we will all end up paying for, for months
and months after that.
So I think you need, we need
to be very gingerly about limitation.
Mm-hmm. Um, now I say that
as a person who's probably spent more three minutes
before you in the course
of the last year in just about anybody else.
So I've clearly got a vested interest here.
Um, but I also think you have a vested interest in keeping
us honest, whatever that means.
This is a, a back and forth.
I can't understand why more of us aren't here and why, uh,
because I hear from people all the time about
what they think of what you are doing or we are doing right.
And you probably do too.
But this would be the place where
that can come out in the open
and people can say they're safe.
It doesn't seem to happen ever.
Thank you, Mr. Stein Brink.
Anyone else have comments relative to the workshop?
I guess I can't resist John Ponty be street.
Uh, so I've, I've watched, uh,
south Portland government for, uh, many years now,
and I have a deep frustration, uh, whether it's
with the, um, comprehensive plan
or, uh, issues that come up
before the city council, which is
that we have a government here that is, um,
fundamentally participatory.
It, it's a form of government that requires participation.
Uh, and yeah, here's the frustration.
Uh, so often people don't participate.
Uh, so, you know, I'll walk my neighborhood
or, you know, go around the city
and I'll hear people say certain
certain things about certain topics over
and over and over again.
And I, I think I have a sense of how people think about
topic A, topic B, topic C.
But they don't come here
and tell you, you know, they don't speak up.
They're afraid of their neighbors getting angry.
Uh, they're afraid of, um, their businesses being,
uh, disadvantaged.
You know, with, with people with a profit margin that
that's only this big, they're barely making it right.
They can't afford to have anybody angry at them. Right?
Uh, and so issue after issue
after issue, you know, people will say to me, uh, oh,
you're so outspoken.
You, you, you just want what's good for you.
Uh, I almost never come up here
and say something that I don't think
people agree with me about.
I mean, I usually come up here thinking
I'm representing people.
Uh, and yet often I'm the only one doing that, or Jeff.
Uh, so, you know, we've really got a problem in this city
where the form of government is fundamentally participatory,
but people don't participate.
Uh, so whatever you can do to make it easy for,
uh, you know, to go back to, uh, uh, an old phrase, I'll,
I'll date myself here.
Uh, anything you can do to get the silent majority
to speak up, uh, I, I think in fact,
you often hear from people
who do not represent the majority.
Thank you. Yeah.
Okay. Do we have anyone else who wanted to talk about
workshop matters?
Alright, well, that part of our public comment is closed.
Thank you. Now, what I need to ask you is, do we then repeat
and ask for citizen discussion part two?
Mm-hmm. Or did that formally? We do have to do. Okay.
You know, is there anyone, anyone
who did not speak in citizen discussion part one
who would like to do so now on any topic?
Okay. Thank you.
I think we can end citizen discussion part two.
It is closed. Let's hear some Oh, what
Point of order? Yes.
Do we need to actually move to
postpone the consideration of the rules?
Or did I miss that part? Or it's just automatically moves I
On? You mean
any of the rule changes suggested?
I, I think what we have done
during a workshop is we give guidance to staff.
Oh. 'cause this is workshop, then they bring it back,
and then that at that point
we'll look at it and we'll have a vote.
And that Thank you. Won't be tonight.
I appreciate that. All right. All right.
I think we'd like to hear some
communication from the city manager. Thank you. I
Was just gonna mention what our parks
and rec director mentioned about tomorrow
and the tree lighting and, uh, Santa and everything.
So, uh, four 30. Hope to see you there.
Otherwise, enjoy the wind and the cold tonight.
And if anyone, um, needs a warm place tomorrow
because it's cold, uh, we've got library, community Center,
all those places, feel free to stop in, charge your phone if
for some reason power goes out, et cetera,
but let's hope it doesn't.
Gosh. Yes. That is not good. Alright.
Thank you very much, Scott. Um, counselors round robin.
Do we have a counselor who'd like
to say anything about anything? Actually,
I'm just gonna say I watched them starting
to decorate the trees during the day last week,
and boy, yes. That be fun.
Yes, it will be. And
Santa's always dressed really special.
I like to watch, um,
little kids getting their pictures taken.
Aw. So I go, yeah.
Okay. Counselor Matthews your famous trick. I
Know this way. Walker,
We, Uh, we haven't met, uh, well,
I don't know if I was here or whatever,
but, uh, the, uh, I flew out the, uh, day of, uh, uh,
the appreciation breakfast.
And I don't know if anybody spoke about it before,
but, uh, fantastic time.
Thank you to all staff to put that on.
Thank you to the, uh, staff that, uh, is, uh,
creating tomorrow night for the, uh, young kids
and the, uh, old kids.
Um, especially in these, uh, temperatures tomorrow night,
it will be quite cold.
But, uh, thank you for, uh, creating a, uh,
good festive season, uh, for, uh, the people that, uh,
may be struggling at this time. So,
Yeah. Nice
Councilor West.
Well, as we're getting ready for budget season, uh,
one thing I would like to ju to say is, um,
in connection with the Mahoney Project
and how many people in the ci in the community have said
to me that they're very concerned once they get to see,
particularly the police and fire buildings
and how deteriorated those are.
Uh, we do have some buildings that we can be very proud of,
and those are our Public works facility, our
two pretty good fire stations.
And, uh, and I think it's really important
that our budget have a reserve for maintenance
of our buildings that are, that we're not planning
to replace, so that we
can maintain 'em over the years.
And I really am looking forward to seeing that as part
of our budget process this year. Bless you.
Thank you. Thank you. I'll try the trick now.
Counselor Walker. Ah,
Clever, clever.
Um, just three quick things.
One, I wanted to thank the staff of Public Works
for doing an excellent job on our roads
and working so hard on our sidewalks.
Um, I had to drive on Tuesday night
and there was a marked difference when I crossed over from
Scarborough into South Portland.
So I just wanted to say thank you for that. Wow.
Um, the second thing was
that the next office hours are December 13th, I believe.
Councilor with Mayor Madam Mayor Tipton,
um, 10 to 12 at the library.
And then finally, I just wanted to clarify
that despite my no vote, um, earlier, I do very,
very much value our citizens that serve on our boards
and committees and do very much appreciate
all of the work that they do.
So I just wanted that recognized. Thank
You. Thank you.
And Counselor Pride.
Sure. Um, I also want to, uh,
also wanna wish everybody a happy holidays
and I know, I know we don't have any more meetings this
month, so Louis Oh, we have one, one more.
They on Tuesday. Yeah, please come.
It's coming right up. Please
Come. We invite
You. I'm considering
coming to that meeting, so probably won.
Um, so yeah, uh, I, I do want
to address sort of the, the First Amendment stuff we talked
a little bit about in just sort of, and, and also Mr.
Ty's comment, because I think it's really important.
Um, I remember when I was first on the council,
people had five minutes for public comment
during our business meetings,
but only two meeting two minutes for public comment
during a workshop discussion.
And, and in fact, we had both, every meeting we had,
we went from business meeting to, you know, two things
of workshop and then back into
finishing up a business meeting.
And at the beginning of all that,
because meetings seemed to be going forever, we wanted
to do something to, to sort of shorten things up.
And so we tried to eliminate public comment, part two,
citizen discussion, part two, we tried to eliminate that.
The room was packed when we even discussed it,
and every single person was against it.
And some people were berating us even though we hadn't even
really made the decision yet.
Um, so it was, yeah, it was interesting
because I thought the same thing was gonna happen when we
changed it from two to three minutes.
And surprisingly we got a lot more support for that, um,
than we did from, from trying
to eliminate the citizen discussion part two.
Um, but we increased the workshop, which arguably,
and this is something we should think about
because in workshops we're doing more sort of formation.
It's more formative
and I think it needs to be more, you know, if we can make
that more grassroots, that's always better.
And so if we were going to give people more time to talk,
I think workshops are really where
that kind of thing would belong.
So I was happy that we were bringing that from, from,
you know, two to three minutes be, and,
and I would, you know, I would consider more
for workshops just
because, you know, when when we've got the policy to a point
where it can go on an agenda,
so many decisions have already been made.
It's hard to micro mm-hmm. You know, change that.
So, um, anyway,
just a little history, a little background there.
But I also wanted to, uh, mention that, you know,
I was at the barbershop the other day getting
what's left of my haircut.
And, um, I was listening to the conversation of, uh, the,
the barber was happening behind me with, with the person
that was in the chair next to me.
And it was really interesting
'cause they complained about just about everything
that I've been working on for the last three years, um,
and that we've done as a council
and what the city's doing, Mahoney, you know, everything.
And I remember it's like, and I don't remember his name,
but, so I'm gonna make one up.
And the barber said, well, Lou, you know,
you're a standup guy.
We gotta get more of our guys on the council.
You should run. The guy says, I don't have time for that.
I don't have time to go to meetings, you know,
and so that was disappointing.
It was really, you know, I, I get it.
I get that we all live very busy lives.
Um, and you know, the sort of apathy behind that, you know,
I, I wish that those people would email me more.
Um, and that, you know, would call me.
'cause I do have discussions.
I, I, in fact, I, I return almost every call that I get,
but I get them so infrequently because people mm-hmm.
I, my phone number is right on the website, emails.
I'm like, councilor West. Um, and,
and people, you know, I I I return almost every single call
that I get other than the death threats.
Um, and, but, uh, and even them, I'm tempted
because I, I like to have those conversations
with folks more than I, I feel like email's really sterile,
but, you know, so I wish those people would call me.
I wish they had talked to me about what was going on.
I didn't really feel like they want, they wanted me
to know I was eavesdropping and they had no idea
who I was, obviously.
Um, but, but you know, it, it is, I agree with Mr. Panty.
I, I think it is, it is somewhat sad,
but I think it's more than just being afraid
to be called out by your neighbors.
It's also a certain amount of apathy
and just complete busyness that we all, you know, there's
so much expected of us right now.
Uh, every minute of our day is,
is somehow scheduled these days.
So I don't know if there's a way we can make it easier or,
or what, but, um,
we should do everything we can in this space to be inviting
and make it easy to be here.
So that's all I have to say about that.
Thank you Counselor Pride. Counselor Scott.
Um, well first I wanna say that I'm very honored
to be here, um, working with you all
and that the district one
and the city has entrusted this position to me.
Um, so thank you all
and I'm looking forward to working with you.
I had the pleasure of meeting, um, I think almost all
of the department heads and many
of the staff throughout the city this week,
and toured almost all of the, uh, facilities.
And I was incredibly impressed.
Um, I think at the, the cohesiveness
and workings between the departments
and, um, the folks that I met, I think all
had a certain sense of pride in their, in their job.
And serving South Portland beyond just kind
of clocking in and clocking out.
They really do more than their job.
They do more than, than their job with, um,
some challenging facilities and resources.
And I was just incredibly impressed, um,
with staff that I met.
Uh, and I think lastly, I just, to John Ty's point, um,
you know, I, I am really here
because I believe strongly in democracy,
and I think that's based on human connection.
And I really hope throughout my, um, term to foster that
amongst the people who, who do show up, who do work
for our city and are here.
And also recognize that it's incredibly challenging to
not only get to a city council meeting at six 30 at night,
potentially until much later to speak to a point,
but incredibly challenging to then step up to a podium
and speak to a group of city officials
and to the public on tv.
And I hope that all of us, um, take sort of an initiative
to reach out to our members
and allow the accessibility of communication
to be many different forms, even if we are not quite ready
to do full zoom, but really, really reach out
and get those communications
and make sure that, that we are accessible, um,
and that people of, of many different means of communication
and speech
and, uh, introverted, extroverted, um, know,
know that they have an ear.
So thank you for having me.
Thank you. That was lovely.
Um, well, um, thank you.
I just, I, I just want to be clear on one quick thing,
which is that when I was talking about, uh, the tool
of being able to say,
maybe we don't need three minutes
tonight, we can go with two minutes.
Two minutes. What I was envisioning is a crowded,
crowded room, which yay, we would like
to have standing room only.
And the idea behind that would be to make sure that instead
of people sort of saying, Ugh, I have to wait too long,
I'm leaving, that maybe they more people had
more of a chance to make comments.
So that was what my thinking was.
Um, I think that all of us are in favor
of seeing a lot more people here telling us
how they feel about different issues in South Portland.
Um, I wanted to also thank, uh, Mr.
Steinbrenner Steinbrink for his important remarks about our,
uh, Somalian American neighbors in Maine
and in other places.
And, um, finally, I too wanna talk about
the Christmas tree lighting.
Ta-da. Nice thought Mr. Matthews would appreciate this.
I appreciate that. Um, it, the event tomorrow is from four
to six and people can come
and shop in the shops, you know,
from four till five 30 or so.
At 5 45 is when our, um, festivities begin.
And by six, the trees will be lit.
So everyone come on down and please dress warmly.
And with that we're adjourned.
Good job.